name: An_Introduction_to_Trading_in_the_Financial_Markets_Market_Basics
isbn: 0123748380
isbn13: 9780123748386
title: [An Introduction to Trading in the Financial Markets: Market Basics](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0123748380)
author: R. "Tee" Williams
publisher: Academic Press
year: 2010
start: 2022-03-21
stop: 2022-12-26

We were reading this book as part of a book club at work.

There are many parts to the financial systems and this is a easy introduction to
all of them, what they are, and how they fit together.  When I started reading
it, I was working at a firm that was building a marketplace and also offering a
custodial service.  I then moved to another firm that was acting as a financial
advisor, with a close relationship with a broker.  I liked being able to apply
what I was learning to my every day work.

_Fiduciary_: act prudently in the best interest of the client.

There are many, many ways to make money in a financial system.  One party may
charge fees while another may rely on appreciation.  There are plenty of
opportunities for conflicts of interest, which calls for various forms of
regulations.  Various firms can get very creative when finding ways to make
money and design financial instruments.

The book itself often comes across as very light and dry.  There are plenty of
illustrations, but they are very repetitive and don't always add much to the
main text.  Perhaps the other books in the series offer more depth or provide
some case studies.  This one gives a whirlwind tour of all the nomenclature, but
its dryness makes it hard for the more complex concepts to stick.
