name: Micro_A_Novel
isbn13: 9780060873028
isbn: 0060873028
title: [Micro: A Novel](http://amzn.com/0060873027)
author: Michael Crichton
author: Richard Preston
publisher: Harper
year: 2011
acquired: 2011
start: 2012-04-05
stop: 2012-04-11

I received this book as a Christmas present.  I've liked previous Michael
Crichton novels, but they do tend to become formulaic.  Crichton was still
working on this manuscript when he died and Preston finished it for publication.

I started it while vacationing in Waikiki, which is interesting since the action
is set on O'ahu.

Crichton novels are pretty formulaic.  There is a team of experts.  They get in
trouble because of technology run amok.  Not everyone makes it.  Anyone who has
anything to do with money is automatically a psychopath.  The technologies
change, the experts change, but the basic formula remains the same.

There are many facts that are well presented, so you learn a lot reading the
book.  But Crichton tends to take fringe ideas and use them as central plot
devices.  He expounds how these ideas are so revolutionary that they turn their
field upside down.  There is a good reason why these ideas are so fringe.  And
Crichton can be quite pedantic when he shows off how "he gets it better than all
the experts in that field."  This is why I stopped reading his novels after I
had read _Timeline_.  (I still watched the movie, though.)

_Micro_ is a typical Crichton novel.  As someone else said: a kind of
_Honey, I Shrunk the Kids_ for adults.  The premise is mildly interesting.  The
treatment is not really inspired.  The characters are not really likable.  The
plot twists are not completely surprising or really inspired.  The novel has one
really cool thing going for it: it is set on O'ahu.  I'm glad I read it **after**
my trip to Waikiki so I could really dig the landmarks.
