name: Monolith_to_Microservices
isbn: 1492047848
isbn13: 9781492047841
title: [Monolith to Microservices](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1492047848)
author: Sam Newman
publisher: O'Reilly
year: 2019
acquired: 2019-11-04
start: 2019-12-03
stop: 2019-12-20

This book focuses on transitioning from a monolith architecture to one more in
tune with microservices.  The main motivation is to allow separate development
efforts to proceed independently from one another and as quickly as possible.
One issue when developing a monolith is how everything is intertwined together,
making changes more risky, and tying everyone to a single release cadence.
Instead, independent components can be smaller, more cohesive, and can release
new versions on their own schedule.  The complexity does not go away, it just
moves from inside one monolith to between multiple interacting services.

Like his previous book, [_Building Microservices_](#Building_Microservices),
Sam Newman keeps things high-level and technology agnostic.  This is not a
detailed how-to guide with specific technologies.  It shows the big picture and
provides advice that is applicable regardless of your specific technology stack.

To Sam Newman, moving to microservices is a series of trade-offs.  He looks at
the pros and cons at every step.  And at times, a move to microservices may not
be the most appropriate.  He provides a lot of guidance on how to make an
informed decision when evaluating possibilities.  The challenges are not all
technical.  A move to microservices will bring with it changes in the
organization, and you should not underestimate the difficulty of getting people
to change.  I liked the use of spider graphs in assessing a team's capabilities,
both at the beginning of the project and where they might need to be in the
future.  With the usual caveats about bias in metrics and how what you measure
will steer people's behavior, sometimes in unanticipated directions.

There are many useful patterns for separating pieces of code.  From services to
modules to database entities.  And not just the ideal decomposition ones, but
also some more limiting patterns that may be your only options in some cases.  I
was surprised to see a service exposing a SQL interface to integrate with
reporting systems like Tableau.  There is a paragraph about GitHub's Scientist
library in the coverage of the Parallel Run pattern.

Other honorable mentions:

- Strangler Fig pattern
- NGINX reverse proxies
- Service mesh with Envoy sidecar
- Micro frontends
- Sagas instead of distributed two-phase commit

This is the first printing and there are quite a few typos, especially in the
figures.  Examples are in figures 4-9 and 4-17, and there is an entire duplicate
paragraph between pages 139 and 141.
