name: The_Story_of_Kullervo
isbn: 0544706269
isbn13: 9780544706262
title: [The Story of Kullervo](http://a.co/7nVM1Wd)
author: J.R.R. Tolkien
author: Christopher Tolkien
publisher: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
year: 2010
year: 2015
acquired: 2017-10-14
start: 2017-11-17
stop: 2017-12-16

The book has three parts: Tolkien's _The Story of Kullervo_ itself, essays he
wrote on the Finnish _Kalevala_, and a final essay by editor Verlyn Flieger on
how Tolkien drew inspiration from Finnish stories.

In _The Story of Kullervo_ Tolkien is giving his own rendition of the story of
Kullervo from the _Kalevala_, adding his own touches.  Just like Elias
L&ouml;nnrot first collected Finnish stories in the early 19th Century and
synthesized them, taking some creative liberties, Tolkien is going a step
further, re-imagining some of the names and streamlining the plot somewhat.  He
is not aiming for an authentic rendition of the Finnish of Kullervo, but rather
he is expressing how the story resonated in his mind, how it fired up his
imagination, how he saw it unfolding.

The essays are two versions of talks Tolkien gave at Oxford about the _Kalevala_
and Finnish lore.  In them, you can feel how Tolkien essentially fell in love
with a certain version of Finnish culture.

> I am very fond of these poems.
> <footer>page 99</footer>

He extolls the uniqueness of the material in the _Kalevala_ and the quaint charm
of the folklore from Finland.  These stories go hand-in-hand with the landscape
of Finland, its language, and the singing tradition in which they are told.  We
get to see the genesis of Tolkien's narrative style and especially the oddity
that is the character of Tom Bombadil in _The Lord of the Rings_.  With his
magic based in songs and his love and dominion over his domain in the Old
Forest, he looks like Tolkien's re-imagining of V&auml;in&auml;m&ouml;inen.

Also, his description of the nature of the Finnish language reminded me of a
French children' song that describe the processing of wool.  The song playfully
changes the proper termination of words just to make them rhyme.  For example:

    Tondons, tondaine
    La laine des moutaines
    Tondons, tondaine
    La laine des moutons

The words "tondaine" and "moutaines" do not exist in French.  They are
transformations of "tondons" (to shear) and "moutons" (sheep) made especially
for the song to make them rhyme with "laine" (wool).  In this simple nursery
rhyme, I think French speakers can find a small taste of the playful sound of
the Finnish _runos_ that make up the _Kalevala_.

The final essay by editor Verlyn Flieger traces the lineage for how the Finnish
Kullervo leads to Tolkien's _The Story of Kullervo_, which leads to
_The Silmarillion_, _The Hobbit_, and _The Lord of the Rings_.  She clearly
traces how elements of Kullervo become part of the story of T&uacute;rin
Turambar in _The Silmarillion_, down to the speech from his sword before he
dies.  She also postulates on how some of these elements also resonate with
Tolkien's own life: he lost his father and then his mother at a young age, he
was fostered by relatives, and he was at first kept away from the girl he loved.

I will end with last quote:

> [...] all obey the great Rule of the Game in the Kalevala which is to tell at
> least three lies before imparting any accurate information however trivial.
> It had become I think a kind of formula of polite behaviour, for no one seems
> to believe you until your fourth statement (which you modestly preface with
> 'all the truth I now tell you, though at first I lied a little').
> <footer>page 82</footer>
