name: Shogun
isbn: 2891111931
isbn13: 9782891111935
title: Sh&omacr;gun, Le roman des samoura&iuml;s
title: [Sh&omacr;gun](https://a.co/d/7bYrQ5h)
author: James Clavell
publisher: Libre Expression
year: 1975
year: 1984
start: 2024-04-05
stop: 2024-04-30

I read the French translation of the book as I was watching the
[2024 adaptation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sh%C5%8Dgun_(2024_miniseries))
with Hiroyuki Sanada.  All while comparing both to the
[1980 adaptation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sh%C5%8Dgun_(1980_miniseries))
with Richard Chamberlain and Toshiro Mifune.  I did not read the entire book,
and jumped back and forth as I was looking for specific scenes and bits of the
story.

The 1980 adaptation did a great job of showing everything from Blackthorne's
point-of-view.  We learned about the political situation in Japan, their
culture, and the Japanese language through Blackthorne's experiences.  There was
a sense of achievement as we started to understand bits of Japanese dialog and
as we managed to understand more and more as the story progressed.

I was disappointed that this aspect was not in the 2024 adaptation.  But then, I
was surprised to find out it was not in the novel either.  The 2024 adaptation
does a great job of showing the hard work of translators, not just translating
the words automatically, but making smoothing adjustments based on cultural
norms.  There are funny moments when two characters clearly don't understand one
another but still manage to communicate their intent but not their disdain for
one another.  The parts that make it through contrast nicely with the parts that
remain misunderstood.

As far as the story goes, the novel is somewhat in between the two adaptations.
They left out large sections in the 1980 adaptation to spare the viewers of that
time.  They added bits and pieces in the 2024 adaptation to adjust to the
shifting tastes of today's audiences.  The 1980 adaptation uses the names as I
see them in my French translation of the novel.  The 2024 adaptation has changed
some of the names.  I don't quite see the reasoning behind it.  Then again, I
don't quite see the reasoning behind the novel changing the names of historical
figures to begin with.

In the story, characters converse mainly in Japanese and Portuguese, with bits
of Latin and Dutch thrown in for good measure.  The novel was written in English
with occasional Japanese phrases.  (And I read it in French.)  Clavell was
aiming at an English-speaking public.  And the television adaptations are also
aimed at an English-speaking public.  So it makes sense to have the actors speak
English even though they call it Portuguese.  The 1980 adaptation replaced the
Latin with 16<sup>th</sup> flowery English, which I thought was annoying.  The
2024 adaptation left them out altogether, which was a good call.

One thing the 2024 adaptation absolutely nailed right is how we, the viewers,
are never quite sure of the full motivations of each character.  Even when they
are working together, we get a sense that each one is pursuing slightly
different goals and their collaboration is mainly because of a some common
temporary objective.  Every character is very smart, charting their own course
through the events, keeping their cards very close to their chest.  We, the
viewers, only get occasional glimpses into a character's secret heart, and we
have to come up with possible justifications as we watch.

One criticism I hear is that the Japanese characters do not exemplify the wide
variety of Japanese society.  Not everyone is ready to die for honor at any
moment.  Not everyone is obsessed with bushido.  To this, I say the story
focuses members of the samurai social class, and we don't really meet any
peasants, artisans, or merchants.  The book briefly mentions etas.  These other
social classes could have provided more varied points of view, but Blackthorne
does not interact with them and the aristocrats don't seem to concern themselves
directly with them.  As a result, we're shown a very biased sliver of Japanese
society, where it contrasts most with the Western sensibilities of the character
Blackthorne and the author Clavell.  The story is written but Western people for
a Western audience.  An Asian author would have done differently.

I was reading a mass market paperback and the text was sometimes hard to read.
Sometimes, a random letter was missing; there was a blank space, like it was a
printing artefact.  More irritating was when between two paragraphs, we switched
time and place and character.  You think you're continuing one scene, but the
story has actually moved on to something else.  I'll attribute it to the poor
layout of the edition I was reading until I can find evidence otherwise.
