name: Hegemony_or_Survival
isbn13: 9780805074000
isbn: 0805074007
title: [Hegemony or Survival](http://amzn.com/0805074007)
author: Noam Chomsky
publisher: Metropolitan Books
year: 2003
start: 2005-01-11
stop: 2005-01-28

Diatribe against American imperial policies.

Early on, Chomsky warns his reader not to confuse state power with a country and
its people.  One can be critical of state policy while praising the country and
its culture.  Interestingly enough, one reviewer on
[Amazon.com](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/cm/member-glance/-/A3JFR4ZGABKIP2/1/ref=cm_cr_auth/103-4247903-3743005?_encoding=UTF8)
has fallen into that trap and assumes that since Chomsky is critical of the
current administration, he must hate America too.

Chomsky documents how the
[Monroe Doctrine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monroe_Doctrine)
has shaped American policy, both foreign and domestic for the past 150 years.
He uses newspaper articles, declassified documents, and political analysis to
show how successive administrations have built up their military supremacy to an
unparalleled level while at the same time taming the "great beast" of public
opinion, giving them the freedom to use that power to the benefit of the
national elite.  Examples come from involvements in Central and South America,
the Cold War including the Cuban Missile Crisis, to the post-Soviet era and the
war on terror, to the war in Iraq.  The progression is quite frightening.

The book includes 28 pages (10%) of notes listing sources for each quotes, and a
12-page index.  You can check out his facts for yourself, if you have the time
and patience to track down all those sources.

<span class="newthought">Note:</span> If you look at the dates during which I
was reading this book, you will see that they coincide with George W. Bush's
second inaugural address (2005-01-20).  In it, President Bush put forth a goal
to promote freedom in the world.  The future will tell if this was the latest
incarnation of the Monroe Doctrine.  In reaction to the inaugural speech, the
New York Times published, on January 30, an op-ed by Tom Wolfe tying the address
to the Monroe Doctrine and how successive administrations gradually expanded its
reach until it spanned the entire globe.
