name: Victory_City
isbn: 0593243390
isbn13: 9780593243398
title: [Victory City: A Novel](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0593243390)
author: Salman Rushdie
publisher: Random House
year: 2023
acquired: 2023-02-06
start: 2023-08-14
stop: 2023-12-26

Salman Rushdie reimagines the history of the
[Vijayanagara Empire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vijayanagara_Empire) of
Southern India from 1336 to 1565 CE.  He calls it "Bisnaga", after the name used
by Western travelers.  Rushdie imagines the fantastical figure of a girl
touched by the goddess Parvati, who has magical influence over the capital city,
and who is "destined" or "cursed" to live as long as the empire will endure.
Her name is Pampa Kampana.

Rushdie uses an interesting framing device.  Pampa Kampana wrote a long epic
retelling the history of the empire, which was lost to the sands of time.  The
narrator claims the manuscript was recently rediscovered and he is simply
retelling the story in his own words.

> This is that story, retold in plainer language by the present author, who is
> neither a scholar nor a poet but merely a spinner of yarns, and who offers
> this version for the simple entertainment and possible edification of today's
> readers, the old and the young, the educated and the not so educated, those in
> search of wisdom and those amused by folly, northerners and southerners,
> followers of different gods and of no gods, the broad-minded and the
> narrow-minded, men and women and members of genders beyond and in between,
> scions of the nobility and rank commoners, good people and rogues, charlatans
> and foreigners, humble sages, and egotistical fools.
> <footer>pp. 3-4</footer>

Already, we start to see Rushdie's love of language and whimsy.  The (long) list
of opposites is a sign of things to come, stylistically.  Rushdie will use
contrasts many times between characters, between places, between events.

For example:

> Finally something that makes sense.  Let's go to war and bring peace to the
> land.
> <footer>p. 52</footer>

Rushdie also uses the story as a meta-commentary on the creative process and
authoring stories.

> In this way, Pampa learned the lesson every creator must learn, even God
> himself.  Once you had created your characters, you had to be bound by their
> choices.  You were no longer free to remake the according to your own desires.
> <footer>p. 100</footer>

In this, he is a little like Umberto Eco.  This next quote reminds me of
[_Baudolino_](http://amzn.com/0156029065), where Eco explored how our ideas can
shape reality.

> This was the paradox of the whispered stories: they were no more real than
> make-believe but they created the truth, [&hellip;]
> <footer>p. 47</footer>

As part of the framing device, Rushdie has the narrator read from the
_Jayaparajaya_, which was written by Pampa Kampana herself.  She may not be a
reliable narrator in the _Jayaparajaya_, but Rushdie's narrator is taking her at
her word.  The narrator is very complimentary of Pampa Kampana's verses, but
their English translations are somewhat mundane.  I think this effect is
voluntary on Rushdie's part, showing the limits of translations.

> Or was this poetry, a fable like so many others?  We must reply: either it is
> all true, or none of it is, and we prefer to believe in the truth of the
> well-told tale.
> <footer>p. 122</footer>

There is a funny passage where the narrator pitches two different perspectives
against one another: Pampa Kampana retellings of the ascension of Krishna Raya
to the throne against those of an Italian chronicler.  Hers are peaceful and
smart; his are brutal and bloody.  Rushdie uses contrasting characters a lot in
this novel.

Rushdie is effective at blending historical figures with imaginary creations.
He gives realistic renditions of leaders like Hukka and Bukka, and
[Krishnadevaraya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krishnadevaraya), the blinding
of minister Timmarusu, all the way to
[Achyuta Deva Raya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Achyuta_Deva_Raya).  He also
incorporate real Western travellers to Bisnaga, like Portuguese and Venetian
traders who wrote about their travels to the Indian subcontinent.

Pampa Kampana is the main character, so she's the most fleshed out character.
Other characters show up briefly to play their part in the 247-year history of
Bisnaga, so they tend to be more one-dimensional.  She realizes early on that
she will outlive anyone she comes to care for and her humanity takes a hit.  One
of her early lovers says:

> I am the one who loves more strongly than he is loved.
> <footer>p. 65</footer>

Towards the end, Pampa Kampana reflects on the symmetry of her life.  At the
beginning of the story, she sought refuge with a friendly monk who turned out to
be an adversary.  After being blinded, she gets cared for by another monk whom
she thought was an adversary but turned out to be a friend or at least an ally.
At the beginning, she was whispering their story to the people of Bisnaga.  At
the end, they are the ones whispering their lives back to her.

> Pampa Kampana is the mistress of chronology, not its servant.
> <footer>p. 283</footer>

I would add that there is symmetry in the pacing of the novel itself.  In the
first chapters, time in the story flows very slowly, but picks up as the story
progresses.  In the middle chapters, we zoom through a lot of events.  Pampa
Kampana even sleeps through many decades at the halfway point.  (This bit
reminded me of how Patrick S&uuml;skind manages to skip the Seven Year War in
his novel [_Perfume_](#Das_Parfum).)  In the second half of the novel, time
slows down progressively until the last chapter describes barely a few hours.

At the end, Pampa Kampana laments that all whom she chronicled now only exist as
she chose to remember them.  All of their achievements will only be remembered
inasmuch as she decided to include them in her writings, or not.

> Words are the only victors.
> <footer>p. 331</footer>

The narrator claims the name of the capital, Vijayanagar (Vij-aya: victory,
nagar: city), becomes "Bisnaga" in the mouth of a stammering Portuguese.  The
stammering is nicely done with entire English words instead of mere syllables:
"with whore whore horses", "magic war war wall", "the mum magician". (pp. 28-29)
The novel has a lots of Indian words and names: gopi, apsara, Chitra, Mallika,
that are unfamiliar to me and sometimes hindered my ability to relate to the
story.  I usually welcome such immersive experiences, but this one was a little
much for me.
