name: How_to_Destroy_a_Tech_Startup_in_3_Easy_Steps
isbn: 0998997617
isbn13: 9780998997612
title: [How to Destroy a Tech Startup in 3 Easy Steps](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0998997617)
author: Lawrence Krubner
author: Natalie Sidner
publisher: Smash Company
year: 2017
acquired: 2020-07-02
start: 2020-07-09
stop: 2020-07-12

A somewhat funny story of a failed startup.  Claims to be a true story taken
from the life of the main author.  I hear it resonates more with employees than
with founders.  At 172 pages, it was a quick read.  When it first came to my
attention, the startup was going to be about using NLP to talk to databases.  I
imagined NLP instead of SQL.  Could be entertaining.  A shorter, lighter fare
than "The Phoenix Project", maybe?

For the most part, the narrator simply recounts events as he saw them.  His
perspective is that of a truthful and reliable dev guy.  He's trying his best to
convey complex technical tasks as accurately as he can, to make sure everyone is
on the same page.  He paints the biz guy as shifty and somewhat out of touch,
constantly ignoring the narrator in favor of whatever make him look best.  It is
only towards the end of the book, when the real power behind the company is
revealed and they try to use a long list of psychological tricks to manipulate
the narrator, that the book become more introspective and analytical.  At last,
the narrator pauses to reflect on what is happening and lets us in on his deeper
thoughts.  It was interesting to see his reflections regarding the darker, more
aggressive side of sales tactics and the various attempts at psychological
manipulation (i.e., gaslighting).

There is bound to be some bias.  The narrator has all the good, honest qualities
and his antagonist displays all the negative traits.  Is the narrator reliable?
Was the business guy really so much of a sociopath?  Did development really
proceed at such a slow pace?

I related to the context of the book.  A tech startup, a small team of people
trying to get the application running, technologies very close to what I use in
my daily professional life (Unix pipes, websockets, Redis, Twilio, finite state
machines).  I also dig the Manhattan geography.  It was satisfying to imagine
myself as the protagonist and see the business people as the enemies.  But real
life is much more nuanced.  The characters were almost caricatures.

While there are many challenges in building services and integrating with APIs
like Salesforce and doing NLP, I was underwhelmed by what the team was able to
achieve in the span of six months.  If the narrator really has 10-15 years of
experience in startups, he should have stepped in immediately to get things
under control instead of waiting for someone else.  On a six person team, there
is no room for hierarchy and passing the buck around.  If you see a problem, you
fix the problem.  There is no one else to do it for you.

I have had run-ins with people who thought they could parley themselves into
alternate realities.  They exist on the dev side and on the biz side.  Two
quotes summed up perfectly how I tend to interact with such people:

> [...] it would be a mistake to respond as if we were having a good faith
> conversation, eagerly trying to discover the real facts of the situation
> <footer>p. 130</footer>

and

> the thing about reality is that it always wins in the end.
> <footer>p. 143</footer>

As a quick note, throughout the book, whenever I read "Milburn", I kept
imagining the character of Milton from the movie "Office Space".  In the last
section of the book, "Responses to Others", the author actually refers to
Milburn as "Milton".
