name: Beautiful_Evidence
isbn13: 9780961392178
isbn: 0961392177
title: [Beautiful Evidence](http://amzn.com/0961392177)
author: Edward Tufte
publisher: Graphics Press
year: 2006
acquired: 2009-10-04
start: 2021-02-06
stop: 2021-04-10

Ed Tufte's fourth book.  I read the first three a long time ago, and now that
his fifth book came out, I'm trying to catch up.

The core premise, as with other Ed Tufte books, is:

> Making a presentation is a moral act as well as an intellectual activity.
> [...] Thus _consuming_ a presentation is also an intellectual and a moral
> activity.
> <footer>p. 141</footer>

Some people will use all kinds of tricks to fool and deceive their audience.  If
you are not an _enemy of the truth_, you want to avoid these tricks.  You don't
want to use them in your own presentations so your audience can reason about the
facts.  You want to recognize them in case they get used to mislead you.

Analytical designs are meant to make people think and use the tools of thinking.
This is easier for physical sciences that for social sciences.  A malicious
author can use presentations to misrepresent the evidence and mislead the
public. We must guard against cherry-picking, overreach, and punning (where
words become ambiguous).

Ed Tufte repeatedly shows the overwhelming superiority of proper evidence,
clearly presented.

> This evidence-free fancy [Aristotle's claim that all celestial bodies are
> perfect, smooth, and without blemish] had become religious doctrine before
> being demolished by 10 pages of visual observations [of the Moon] reported in
> [Gallileo's] _Sidereus Nuncius_.
> <footer>p. 98</footer>

> And that is the grand, forever consequence of _Sidereus Nuncius_: from then
> on, all science, to be credible, had to be based on publicly displayed
> evidence of seeing and reasoning, and not merely on wordy arguments.
> <footer>p. 101</footer>

And conversely, PowerPoint rots your brain. It was designed by programmers and
marketing people.  It promotes a one-way transfer of information.  The presenter
gives curated crumbs of data, the audience listens.

Ed Tufte worked with NASA to show how engineering reports are much more
conducive to communicating information for important decisions.

> Sentences are smarter than the grunts of bullet points.
> <footer>p.182</footer>

Principles of presenting evidence:

1. Show comparisons, contrasts, differences.
1. Show causality, mechanisms, explanations, systematic structure.
1. Show multivariate data; that is, show more than 1 or 2 variables.
1. Completely integrate words, numbers, images, diagrams.
1. Thoroughly describe the evidence. Provide a detailed title, indicate the authors and sponsors, document the data sources, show complete measurement scales, point out relevant issues.
1. Analytical presentations ultimately stand or fall depending on the quality, relevance, and integrity of their content.

As with all Ed Tufte books, this one is very example-driven.  The high quality
of all the examples can be a distraction from the point the author is trying to
make.  I oftentimes lost myself in what the examples were presenting and I had
to drag my mind back to what point Tufte was trying to make.
