name: On_Literature
isbn13: 9780156032391
isbn: 0156032391
title: [On Literature](http://amzn.com/0156032392)
title: <i>Sulla Letteratura</i>
author: Umberto Eco
publisher: Harcourt
year: 2004
year: 2002
acquired: 2012
start: 2012-08-27
stop: 2012-09-19

The book is a collection of essays written by Umberto Eco for various
conferences.

### On Some Functions of Literature (2000)

_Literature keeps language alive._  It creates a shared body of stories and
characters.  Different authors each given them their own spin, but their core is
part of the collective consciousness.

### A Reading of the _Paradiso_ (2000)

_Paradiso_ is about light, which was an important concept to medieval readers
and thinkers.  Cathedrals are all about different kinds of light.  We don't pay
as much attention to the quality light anymore; and it lessens our ability to
truly appreciate the text as much as it was when it was written.

### On the Style of _The Communist Manifesto_ (1998)

The format and structure of the Manifesto is a great sample of packing a lot of
power in a concise space.  It has all the drama and plot twists of the best
narratives.

### The Mists of the Valois (1999)

How the imperfect tense can lead to enough fuzziness about the action to leave
the reader in perpetual mists and create an atmosphere more felt than any
feelings explicitly expressed in words.  This effect can then be reinforced and
amplified by various narrative techniques.

### Wilde: Paradox and Aphorism (2000)

An aphorism is a maxim that is witty and which appears to be true.  It expresses
something commonplace.  A paradox is a maxim that is witty and appears false at
first glance, but reveals a deeper truth upon further examination.  To tell them
apart, reversing an aphorism produces something that still makes sense, whereas
reversing a paradox yields nonsense.

### A Portrait of the Artist as Bachelor (1991)

How James Joyce's style and literary pursuits were already well established by
the time he graduated from college.

### Between La Mancha and Babel (1997)

How Joyce and Borges try to re-invent language, each in their own way.  Joyce
by looking at all permutations of symbols.  Borges by looking at all
permutations of ideas.

Another interesting piece is how in _Don Quixote_, the story starts when the
main character leaves a library to discover the world outside.  In one of
Borges' novels, the main character enters a Library of Babel to escape from the
world outside and experience reality through books.

### Borges and My Anxiety of Influence

Sometimes, an author borrows an idea from another author.  Sometimes, an author
develops an idea from the general context, not knowing that another author has
also expressed the same idea too.  Some times, an author develops an idea from
the general context, not knowing that another author was directly responsible
for putting it there.

### On Camporesi: Blood, Body, Life (1995)

Camporesi was a cultural anthropologist who studied texts for cultural
artifacts, studying the underbelly of civilization.

### On Symbolism (1994)

Symbolism as understood by the scholastic philosophers.  There is the perceived
world of phenomena and the world of ideals hiding behind it.  In this way,
everything is a symbol that stands for an ideal which we cannot perceive
directly.

### On Style (1995)

Style is how a work of art is put together.  Eco identifies three ways of
studying style.  In a _review_, the writer tells the reader about a book the
reader has not yet read and impose the writer's judgment.  A
_history of literature_ discusses works that the reader already knows.  In both
cases, the writer can do _artifex additus artifici_ (an artist writing about an
artist) where he explains how he felt as he produced the work of art.  Or he can
do _philosophus additus artifici_ (a philosopher writing about an artist) where
he explains why a given work of art is beautiful.  The third way of studying
style is the _semiotic reading_ in which the writer shows how the work of art
produces pleasure, rather than prescribing what gives pleasure.

### _Les S&eacute;maphores sous la Pluie_ (1996)

How a writer relies on some common images or experiences shared with the reader.
If the reader does not share a given image or experience, part of what the
writer was trying to communicate will get deformed or lost.

### The Flaws in the Form

Elements in the structure of a text.  If the work of art arises from the whole
of the composition and how the parts all fit together, then which parts
essential?  Does it mean that everything else just fodder?  Will the art still
arise if we remove those non-essential parts.  And what about stopgaps, small
particles that enhance the flow of the work and assure its stability?

### Intertextual Irony and Levels of Reading (1999)

Draws heavily on Eco's _Reflections on "The Name of the Rose."_  Eco is a big
fan of layering multiple levels of meaning in his prose.  The reader can choose
which level they latch on when interpreting a text.  Not all readers can access
all levels of a text.  Some of them require specific knowledge to fully grasp
them.  But missing out on one level should not keep the reader from appreciating
others.

### The _Poetics_ and Us (1990)

The influence of Aristotle's _Poetics_.  Notions of _pragma_ (action) and
_mythos_ (plot) and how they apply to the many forms of story-telling.

### The American Myth in Three Anti-American Generations (1980)

Disregarding American politics, American literature of the late 19th and early
20th Century appealed to European intellectuals.  The American it portrayed was
open and free and devoid of all the barriers and structures that were so
limiting on the Old World.

### The Power of Falsehood (1994)

How lies and fakes have played pivotal roles in the history of the Western
World.  The Donation of Constantin solidified the power of the Catholic Church
in Rome and was the basis of the power of the Papacy from the fall of Rome to
modern times.  The letter of Prester John motivated the West's exploration and
expansion into the East.

### How I Write (1996)

Eco's own quirky approach to writing his novels.  It focuses on
[_The Name of the Rose_](http://amzn.com/0544176561),
[_Foucault's Pendulum_](http://amzn.com/0151327653), and
[_The Island of the Day Before_](http://amzn.com/0156030373), with some bits
about [_Baudolino_](http://amzn.com/0156029065).  He describes parts that were
essential to him which I do not remember at all.  Makes me want to re-read all
his novels.  Right now.
