name: Building_Microservices
isbn: 1491950358
isbn13: 9781491950357
title: [Building Microservices](http://amzn.com/1491950358)
author: Sam Newman
publisher: O'Reilly
year: 2015
acquired: 2015-07-06
start: 2015-07-20
stop: 2015-07-24

I worked with Sam a few years ago and I was curious to see what he'd been up to.

Microservices are all the rage, right now.  At work, I've been struggling with a
monolith of my own.  We cannot upgrade the technology stack because the task is
just too big.  Had we had a microservice-based approach, we would have had small
pieces that we could have upgraded one at a time over time.

The most important characteristic of microservices is to minimize coupling
between them, so that the lifecycle of one is not tied to the lifecycle of any
others.  With an independent lifecycle, a microservice is free to evolve at its
own pace.  Finding the right boundaries between microservices is therefore
critical.  And the choice of integration technology can influence the options
for implementing a microservice too.

The book gives a whirlwind tour of the a wide array of techniques and
technologies that can help you manage a simple service but become crucial when
dealing with a large number of cooperating microservices.  Some examples, in no
particular order:

- HATEOAS
- Docker
- customer-driven contracts
- Graphite
- ELK (Elasticsearch, Logstash, Kibana)
- collectd
- Strangler pattern when replacing legacy systems
- immutable servers
- correlation IDs
- Netflix's Simian Army
- circuit breakers and bulkheads to contain failures
- distributed transactions
- data pumps for aggregating data in data warehouses
- RPC vs. event-based

Some of the anecdotes reminded me of experiences I've had a Google, some of them
great and some of them less so.  Overall, the book gives broad coverage of all
the things you must keep in mind if you want to start using microservices.  It
does not provide in depth coverage of any one topic, so you have to look
elsewhere for direct implementation advice.  The book does give you a number of
places to start looking, and the big picture view so you can see how the pieces
fit together.
