name: Designing_Event_Driven_Systems
isbn13: 9781492038221
title: [Designing Event-Driven Systems](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/designing-event-driven-systems/9781492038252/)
author: Ben Stopford
publisher: O'Reilly
year: 2018
acquired: 2021-04-16
start: 2021-05-01
stop: 2021-06-04

A guide on building event-driven applications on top of Kafka.  I was curious to
see how it would relate to _messaging_ as an approach to software development,
as described in
[_Enterprise Integration Patterns_](BooksBackLog.html#Enterprise_Integration_Patterns).
It turns out this book is more about _event sourcing_, an advanced flavor of
messaging where the message broker holds messages indefinitely and becomes the
data store and the source of truth in the system.

The book is heavily biased towards Kafka and Confluent, to the point that it is
more about praising Kafka specifically than designing systems in general.  It
does a good job of describing the features and capabilities of Kafka, but it is
light on concrete examples.  There is a big gap between the few illustrative
lines of KSQL in the book and the complexity of the code on GitHub.  Kafka has
libraries for Java and native connectors for other languages, but some of the
higher functions, like materialized views and state stores, are only  accessible
from Java and you need a sidecar setup to run them besides your non-Java code.
There is no example of that.

I was surprised to learn that Kafka was invented at LinkedIn.  According to the
book, Amazon popularized SOA, then Netflix pushed SOA to its limits to give us
microservices, and LinkedIn embraced microservices and created Kafka as a tool
to help it, manage them.

Kafka was designed from the beginning for decentralized processing and very high
parallelism.  This explains the constant focus on partitions every time someone
tries to explain Kafka.  It is meant for managing streams and transforming data
in flight, much more than a simple message bus used for inter-process
communication.  The book describes installations with 100s of brokers.

I liked the parts about non-persistent services that recreate their state from
the stream when they (re)start.  It is a very different way to look at services.
The author refers to "the databased turned inside out."

> when a new node starts, it must load all stateful components
> <footer>p.52</footer>

> a single repository of event data is used to feed many views, and each view
> can flex with the needs of that particular team.
> <footer>p. 91</footer>

The book introduced me to complex patterns like CRDT to manage asynchronous
updates in a large system, where messages may get delayed and arrive out of
order.  Kafka has its own concept of transactions and the book briefly touches
on sagas and dead letter topics for error handling.

The example system in the last chapter shows many concepts and how they build on
each other to fulfill the application.  I liked how they _rekey_ topics to
partition them on one field or another so matching partitions can be joined
together in one node without the need for complex IPC.  But the book doesn't
show concretely how to set this up.  It is left as an exercise for the reader.

You can download a
[free copy in PDF format](https://www.confluent.io/designing-event-driven-systems/),
thanks to Confluent.
