name: The_Future_of_Reputation
isbn: 0300124988
title: [The Future of Reputation](http://amzn.com/0300124988)
author: Daniel Solove
publisher: Yale University Press
year: 2007
start: 2008-03-26
stop: 2008-04-11

A very interesting look at how the Internet is changing the way
we communicate, even the less positive aspects of communication,
such as gossip and shaming.  The book is full of real-life examples
taken from recent Internet events, such as the Star Wars Kid.  In
many of these cases, the person who first posted a piece of data
did not intend for it to travel so far.  What could start aimed at
a small group of friends would quickly get out of hand and be
broadcast to the entire world.  Or someone trying to shame someone
else for a minor infraction could lead to virtual lynch mobs.

You can think of it as information traveling away its source and
being slowed by the friction of the medium.  Most people cannot
afford very wide distribution using traditional media, so
information does not travel very far from them.  Even with large
distribution media such as newspapers and television, editors can
decide what is worth publishing or not and can therefore influence
the spread of information.  People can feel in control of the
information they spread around.

But the Internet has a very low bar to entry and virtually no
controls.  In essence, it is a frictionless environment for the
spread of information.  Once you release something, it immediately
escapes your control.  You are guaranteed that it will be taken as
far as the most radical point-of-view within the audience, whether
you like it or not.

One nice part of the book deals with social networking sites.
In the real world, we have many overlapping circles of
relationships: family, friends, coworkers, etc.  We usually share
information within one circle but rarely between circles.
Something that is of interest to my family may not interest my
coworkers, or the members in my kendo club.  Pretty much all the
social networking sites today have a flat view of my "friends" and
lumps all relationships together.  On
[Facebook](http://facebook.com/), there is no
distinction between family and friends and coworkers and fellow
kendo enthusiasts.  They all see the same profile, they all see
what is happening in my other circles of relationships.  I cannot
expose some fact through my profile to one group but not to the
others.  There is a place in the market for a social networking
solution that would let me manage groups of relationships and
better mirror real-world behaviors.

There are two things that bug me about this book.

First, Solove wants to use the law to keep people from taking
things too far.  It works for copyright law.  But the law operate
within national boundaries.  There are no national boundaries on
the Internet.  There is no body of law that can govern
international events.  And why should American norms govern an
incident between, say, someone in China and someone in Ghana.

Which brings me to the second thing that bugs me.  Solove
decidedly takes an American-centric take on norms of behavior.
Not only that, but he seems to assume that a single set of norms
can cover everybody.  There is a wide array of cultures out there
and half the things that one cares about is annoying to most of
the others.  There are countless things that are inconsequential
to one culture and severe transgressions to another.  There cannot
be a single set of norms that applies across the whole Internet.

It was still a good, quick read, nonetheless.
