name: The_Long_Tail
isbn: 1401309666
title: [The Long Tail](http://amzn.com/1401309666)
author: Chris Anderson
publisher: Hyperion
year: 2008
start: 2010-05-21
stop: 2010-07-22

I first heard about the idea of the Long Tail on my first day at Google, back in
2005.  Four years later, I borrowed the book from work, out of curiosity.  The
shorter commute and new friends on the train mean less time for reading, so this
one might take me a bit to get through.

I like the three requisites for capitalizing on a long tail market:

1. Democratize the means of production to generate a lot of content.
1. Means of distribution that are essentially free make that content available to everyone.
1. Powerful technological tools help make sense of it all.

These three factors combine to create large numbers of niche markets that can
sustain themselves.  Essentially, what used to be the province of the privileged
few is now in the hands of everyone.  There will be lots of low quality
products, but technology can help us find the worthy pieces hiding in there.  I
love how it democratizes everything.  There is still a large demand for _hits_
and critics, but the elites don't hold all the cards anymore and anyone can
contribute.

The section on marketing in the Long Tail does a very good job of describing
the new dynamics and some of the impact of end-user engagement.

The book does a good job describing new businesses that exploit the long tail,
like Amazon and Google.  But it was written just before the explosion of YouTube
and Facebook and Twitter.  Now, more than ever, we're in a world of citizen
journalists and an empowered general population.  The book is very "of the
moment" and it shows its magazine roots.  It throws around a lot of names that
were relevant at the time of publication but who are not so relevant just a few
years down the line.  Blockbuster and Rhapsody are gone now.
