name: Dune
isbn: 0441013597
isbn13: 9780441013593
title: [Dune](https://a.co/d/dFQo7wt)
author: Frank Herbert
publisher: ACE
year: 1965
year: 2005
acquired: 2023-12-25
start: 2024-02-03
stop: 2024-02-29

People who see David Lynch's 1984 movie adaptation of _Dune_ before having read
the book stand a chance of actually liking that movie.  I count myself as part
of this group.  People who read the book first all profoundly dislike the movie.
One of my friends who read the book first always gives me grief when I say I
liked the movie, and even more grief when I would admit that I still hadn't read
the book.

I have now read the book, so that portion of grief should go away.  But I still
like the David Lynch movie.  I saw it first and imprinted on it, so it holds a
special place in my heart.

I received the book as a Christmas present, so I **had** to finally read it.  I
have owned an old copy for a long time, and I had read a few passages here and
there.  But I had never committed to reading it cover to cover.  I have seen all
the movies and TV series multiple times, but I still hadn't read the book.

Reading the book, I can see how the David Lynch movie adaptation is like a
zombie corpse of the novel and why fans of the book can hate is so much.  It is
bad _Dune_, but still decent science-fiction.  And endlessly quotable.  Its
scenes do a good job creating feelings that drive the story, even if they are
sowhat at odds with those in the book.  For that matter, even the Denis
Villeneuve movie is a pale rendition that skims the surface but lacks
the depth of the original material.  But it still works as its own artistic
endeavor.

The book is light in description of action scenes.  Most of the major battles
happen between chapters.  Even the dramatic battle at the end is briefly
glimpsed by the Emperor through a door.  Movies are a great medium for showing
action.  They can elaborate on these scenes without fear of contradicting the
novel.

In the movies, the treason of Dr. Yueh is revealed as a surprise to the viewer.
In the book, there is hardly a mention of him that doesn't beat this fact, that
he is a traitor, into the reader.

> "Yueh!  Yueh!  Yueh!" goes the refrain.  "A million deaths were not enough for
> Yueh!"
> <footer>p. 74</footer>

The book emphasises the mysticism of Fremen culture and how they hide from the
world at large.  Paul and Jessica hint at how much of that mysticism was seeded
by the Bene Gesserit and grew organically from there.  That Paul fulfills the
(White Savior) prophecy is not so much a mystic force at play in the universe.
"They see what they've been told to see," as Paul puts it in the Denis
Villeneuve movie.  The novel is about manipulation.

It is also about consequences.  After Paul goes to live with the Fremen, his
mind is bent on preventing the jihad.  He keeps seeing the future and trying to
set it on a different course through his actions.  He inexorably creates the
conditions that will lead to the jihad.  At the end of the novel, he has to
accept that the jihad is inevitable.  If he dies, he will become a martyr.  If
he lives, he will lead it.

In the afterword by Brian Herbert says:

> Dad told me that you could follow any of the novel's layers as you read it,
> and then start the book all over again, focusing on an entirely different
> layer.
> <footer>p. 686</footer>

Umberto Eco said the same thing about his novel
[_The Name of the Rose_](#Il_nome_della_rosa) and his theory of the role of the
reader.
