name: Why_Orwell_Matters
isbn: 0465030505
title: [Why Orwell Matters](http://amzn.com/0465030505)
author: Christopher Hitchens
publisher: Basic Books
year: 2002
start: 2010-07-23
stop: 2010-09-01

This is Hitchens' attempt at explaining Orwell's thoughts and to show how they
are still relevant half a century later.

Hitchens opted for a thematic approach to Orwell rather than a chronological
one.  He has separate chapters for imperialism, socialism, nationalism, etc.
Each time, Hitchens shows how Orwell's views were shaped by events in his life
and how they evolved in his writings.  Hitchens also shows how other writers
perceived these views, some are contemporaries of Orwell and others are writers
who came well after him.  It was interesting when Hitchens had to disapprove of
Salman Rushdie, whom he considers a close friend.  Hitchens was definitely less
harsh about this friend than about the other detractors.

Personally, I am not very familiar with Orwell's life, so a timeline of major
events and publications would have been useful.  I knew that
[_Animal Farm_](#Animal_Farm) came before
[_Nineteen Eighty-Four_](http://amzn.com/0452284236),
but I hadn't realized that Orwell had died right after publishing the latter.

_Imperialism_: About imperialism in general, and British imperialism in
particular, Orwell wrote: "the whole colonial 'racket' was corrupting to the
British and degrading to the colonized."  This passage shows how he empathized
with the common people and how he disliked those who are entrusted with power
but turn out to be bullies.

_Political Left_: About the Left, there is a hilarious quote where Orwell takes
the contents of the Trotskist trials in Russia and changes the characters to
English personalities.  In it, Churchill is trying to convert the entire British
Empire to communism by getting postal workers to draw moustaches on postage
stamps.  It's hilarious, until you realized such fabulations were taken as real
in communist Russia.  Orwell's total distrust of totalitarianism did not win
him many friends in socialist circles who espoused the Russian Socialist
Revolution.  Many "had set up to praise the Moscow regime and returned in
disgust."  Orwell didn't need to go there; his experience in Catalonia during
the Spanish Civil War had been enough for him to see the truth behind these
regimes.  He had first-hand exposure to how history is written by the victors,
which would culminate in the thought, in _Nineteen Eighty-Four_, that "he who
controls the present controls the past."

_Political Right_: On the Right, Orwell's love of individualism and popular
wisdom didn't win him too many friends either.  More exactly, they were quick to
edit his thoughts, picking and choosing the bits that they liked and silencing
those that they didn't agree with.  They reconstructed an ideal Orwell, one that
would be best suited to their own points of view.  Orwell was a staunch
anti-communist and was convinced that Socialism would inevitably lead to
despotism.  This view was not popular while the Powers of the West were still in
alliance with Socialist Russia to fight fascism in Europe.  In one passage,
Hitchens shows how a quote by Orwell about European nations being too weak
individually resist super-powers and needing to band together.  This quote was
selectively edited to portray that these nations were too weak and needed to
align with a super-power.

Orwell envied the freedom that was pervasive in America and its culture.  "In
America the tradition of nineteenth-century freedom is still alive, though no
doubt the reality is as dead as it is here" [in England].  This quote shows that
he yearned for the freedom that he felt was available in America, but he also
feared disappointment if he should ever go looking for it and find it long gone.
He was also very in love with the British culture he had been raised in and
resented how Americans caricatured the English.

The image of Orwell that emerges is that of someone who wanted each individual
to be allowed to pursue happiness, who distrusted elites (especially leadership
social classes), and who loved intelligence.  He had a profound love for the
pastoral English countryside and other staples of English life, but in a
practical way.  Such as when he writes about people who idealize nature: "The
fact is that those who really have to deal with nature have no cause to be in
love with it."

As much the humanist as he might have been, Orwell may have had shortcomings
regarding women, both in his novels and in his writings.  Hitchens mentions that
the women in Orwell's life were all strong-willed and very intelligent.  Other
anecdotes seem to indicate that he held very progressive views, but maybe these
had more to do with women's low status in society and that he saw them as yet
another exploited class.  He didn't care much for idealists that were all talk
and no action, and his treatment of feminists was no different.

Late in his life, he drew up and shared a list of _soft socialists_ in what
seemed like a betrayal of his long hatred for the underhanded means used by
communists and fascists.  Hitchens tries to redeem Orwell by showing that the
names on the list were either well-known for their softness, were already a
matter of public record, or were actually helped by their new-found publicity.
Dubious and disappointing nonetheless.

Hitchens' book closes with a review of how Orwell's style progressed from the
_angry young man_ style of his early novels to his progressive hatred for
totalitarianism that culminates in _Nineteen Eighty-Four_.

Overall, the book is an extensive look at Orwell's novels, with extras from his
other publications and his life.  It does a great job to cover the ideas that
Orwell expressed in his novels and how they were perceived by the literary
elite.  He was a humanist who cared deeply about those oppressed by society and
he was very critical of the upper classes doing the oppression.  He witnessed
the rise of fascism and communism by appealing to populist and nationalist
feelings.  He saw how the educated elites were dismantled so they could not
justify opposition to would-be despots.  It is good, even now, to remember how
democratic institutions can be co-opted by groups who seek only their own
advancement at the expense of other members of society.
