name: Sex_at_Dawn
isbn13: 9780061707803
isbn: 0061707805
title: [Sex at Dawn](http://amzn.com/0061707805)
author: Christopher Ryan
author: Cacilda Jeth&aacute;
publisher: Harper Collins
year: 2010
acquired: 2012-04-26
start: 2012-08-17
stop: 2012-08-26

From the reviews, this books sounds a bit controversial and seems to go against
accepted wisdom.  To be read with a dose of critical judgement.  I like to
challenge my assumptions and consider alternatives, but that doesn't
automatically make them right.

The book's premise is that humans are not naturally monogamous.  Monogamy was
introduced when we discovered agriculture.  Prior to that, our hunter-forager
ancestors had no notion of property and shared everything.

In The Naked Ape, Desmond Morris specifically ignored primitive societies.  In
order to study humans, he focused on their dominant representation.  In his
view, primitive societies must have had some defects that limited their
expansion.  Not knowing what these defects might be, he abstained from including
them so as not to taint his data.

The authors of Sex at Dawn take a different approach.  To them, these primitive
hunter-foragers can give us a glimpse of what our ancestors might have been
like.  The authors complement their approach by also looking at our closest
relatives in the animal kingdom: chimps, but even more so bonobos.  The picture
that emerges is quite different from the mainstream vision we inherited from
Hobbes (1651): human life was _solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short_, and
from Malthus (1798), at a time when overpopulation and famine were unavoidable.
Instead, the authors point at hunter-forager societies that live in equilibrium
with their environment, share resources, and lead a mostly peaceful existence.

By combining data on bonobos from biologists, on primitive societies from
anthropologists, and on modern sexual behavior from psychologists, they raise
the possibility that Homo sapiens spent most of its evolutionary history in
small, tightly-knit groups, where both men and women had multiple sexual
partners and no hard-fixed patterns.  They shared everything, even themselves,
including child-rearing.  When we discovered agriculture and property became
important, that is when we tried to force ourselves into monogamous
relationships, and the nuclear family model.  The tension between the demands of
monogamy and our looser evolutionary attitude towards sex would be at the root
of our contemporary problems.

They don't go so far as to recommend we all start sleeping around.  But
understanding what drives our nature, refined through hundreds of thousands of
years of evolution, can help us be honest about ourselves and learn to live
without the guilt.

All the material in the book made a lot of sense and much of it deserves further
looking into.  While they suspect bias in many other authors, it is not clear
that they didn't have their own bias too.  Some reactionary backlash is to be
expected.  I didn't care much for their writing style.  All the snide sarcastic
remarks and juvenile retorts made it look like it was written by a pair of
teenagers.  As if!

And, I learned a new word:
[prurient](https://www.google.com/search?q=define%3Aprurient).  :-)

On 2013-01-16, it was mentioned in a NY Times article:
[Darwin Was Wrong About Dating](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/13/opinion/sunday/darwin-was-wrong-about-dating.html).

On 2015-05-19, I came upon this article in The Guardian where
[Mark Dyble of University College London published a study on sexual equality](http://gu.com/p/4926j/sbl)
that reinforces many of the conclusions of Ryan and Jeth&aacute;.  The Guardian
article highlights many points from both the sex contract and the fierce
egalitarianism points of view.  The article was a good summary of how the debate
has been going over the past 200 years, without picking a side.
