name: Grails_in_Action
isbn: 1933988932
title: [Grails in Action](http://amzn.com/1933988932)
author: Glen Smith
author: Peter Ledbrook
publisher: Manning
year: 2009
start: 2009-10-20
stop: 2009-11-19

We're using [Grails](http://grails.org/) at work.  I went through the first
chapter and the starting tutorial.  I was using Grails 1.1.1, but ran into some
snags.  The `save()` method of domain objects didn't work.  I downgraded to
version 1.1 and it worked fine.  I upgraded to version 1.2-M3 (experimental)
and it worked, but something failed later on when I introduced a service, as per
the example.  The section on testing talked about integration tests, but the
code samples were for unit tests.  The book could have used more proof reading.

Buying the physical book entitled me to download the PDF version for free.
That's nice.

It mentioned Guice in passing when talking about dependency injection.  I hoped
there would be a way to use Guice with Grails.  That would have been awesome.
But a look at the index and a search through the PDF showed one a single
reference to the word "Guice".  Too bad.  It seems Grails uses Spring internally
for its dependency injection needs.  It does have an interesting automatic
injection mechanism for certain classes.  Controllers, for instance, only need
to create a variable with a given service's name and it gets injected
automagically.  It doesn't seem to work for tests, though; I can't ask for a
service instance to be injected in my test for the service.

There is a very nice section on testing that shows you how to unit test the
various artifacts like domain classes, controllers, services, etc.  The examples
include mocking.  There is also a section on integration tests.  I wrote some
unit tests and the facilities added to Java's Collections API made creating test
data a synch.

There is a long list of plugins for Grails.  It would be nice to have a more
exhaustive introduction to the major plugins.  There is a nice chapter that
talks about a few plugins, but it is tied a little too closely to the sample
application the authors are building throughout the book.  Some would be useful
to me, others wouldn't.  Other plugins are introduced through other chapters,
such as `acegi` when talking about security.  I understand that the list of
plugins is ever-changing and that a book cannot really keep up, but I feel like
there are gems hidden in there that I am going to miss because of information
overload.

Between this book and the
[online documentation](http://grails.org/doc/latest/), I have found answers to
almost all my questions.  I did have to peek at the code on a few occasions.
