name: Termination_Shock
isbn: 0063028050
isbn13: 9780063028050
title: [Termination Shock](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0063028050)
author: Neal Stephenson
publisher: Harper Collins
year: 2021
acquired: 2021-12-25
start: 2022-02-20
stop: 2022-07-16

I received this book as a Christmas present.  It is set in a future severely
impacted by climate change, much like
[_The Ministry for the Future_](#The_Ministry_for_the_Future).  Climate change
does not affect every nation or people equally, so different people have
different incentives to act.  As one ultra-rich individual tries their hand at
geoengineering, various geopolitical players jockey for position, trying to make
sure events maximize their own position.

> People were expensive; the way to display, or to enjoy, great wealth was to
> build an environment that could only have been wrought, and could only be
> sustained from one hour to the next, by unceasing human effort.
> <footer>p. 145</footer>

Throughout most of the novel, the main characters have no agency.  They are led
from one place to next and act as vehicles for exposition.  Laks is on
auto-pilot for most of the novel, except for a brief moment of agency while at
the LAC.  Rufus is just doing what he's told for the most part, except for a
brief moment of action at the novel's climax.  Saskia never has any agency
whatsoever, which is fitting for her role as a queen and a figurehead, but is
really boring for the reader.

Stephenson wrote a novel version of paint-by-numbers.  Exotic locations, check!
Natural disasters, check!  Plugs for pop culture, check!

> ... the Fellowship, now filled out to a Tolkien-compliant head count of nine
> <footer>p. 286</footer>

Many threads lead nowhere.  Events and various character developments come out
of nowhere.  I'm looking at you, Willem!  There is often a lot of exposition to
set the stage, and then the action is resolved off-screen.  It is almost as if
Stephenson had too many ideas he wanted to develop, ran out of time, and forgot
to clean the partial threads that had been started but would lead nowhere.
