name: Refactoring_Second_Edition
isbn: 0134757599
isbn13: 9780134757599
title: [Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code, Second Edition](http://a.co/d/d98Vmak)
author: Martin Fowler
publisher: Addison-Wesley
year: 2019
acquired: 2018-08-16
start: 2019-01-04
stop: 2019-02-13

An update to the 1999 classic _Refactoring_.  I still have my autographed copy
of the first edition.  The original used code examples in Java.  This new
edition uses JavaScript instead.

I followed Fowler's advice to "read the first four chapters completely, then
skip-read the catalog."  It's the same approach I used when I read Gerard
Meszaros' [_xUnit Test Patterns_](#xUnit_Test_Patterns).  The initial
chapters make a case for refactoring and describe the general principles.  The
remainder of the book is a nice catalog of specific refactorings, each using a
clear template.

Many people associate refactoring with the first edition of this book.  It is
the seminal work on the topic.  Therefore, many people credit Fowler for
bringing refactoring to the attention of the masses.  I did not remember, from
reading the first edition, how much Fowler owed to Kent Beck.  In the
introduction, he credits Beck for introducing him to refactoring.  It is very
interesting to watch the interplay between these two strong players of
contemporary software development.

One constant concern is the importance of naming.  Many refactorings deal with
putting good names on programming artifacts.

Throughout the book, Fowler is always trying to find the balance between doing
the right thing in general and doing the right thing for the particular case.
Above all, he values flexibility and being able to adjust to the circumstances.
This is why some refactorings have an inverse, so Fowler can modify his code
back and forth, as dictated by his understanding of the moment.

This flexibility shows up again in the topic of testing.  Some authors advocate
lots of tests and maximize coverage, going so far as to fail the build if
coverage gets too low.  This is a mindless application of testing and its
strongest supporters often use it to mask their own poor skills at coding.
Fowler supports a smarter approach that is more humanistic and tries to maximize
the return on the effort invested in testing.

> There is a law of diminishing returns in testing, and there is the danger that
> by trying to write too many tests you become discouraged and end up not
> writing any.  You should concentrate on where the risk is.
> <footer>page 98</footer>

Fowler refers to the Law of Demeter as "the Occasionally Useful Suggestion of
Demeter" (p. 192).

On a personal note, since I started been programming in Groovy and using
closures, I find myself using
[collection pipelines](https://martinfowler.com/articles/collection-pipeline/)
a lot.  I have come to prefer that style of code over the previous, more
procedural one.  As a result, I really liked the Replace Loop with Pipeline
(231) refactoring.
