name: The_Secrets_of_Consulting
isbn13: 9780932633019
isbn: 0932633013
title: [The Secrets of Consulting](http://amzn.com/0932633013)
author: Gerald Weinberg
publisher: Dorset House
year: 1985
start: 2009-02-03
stop: 2009-02-23

At the suggestion of a colleague, I'm reading Jerry Weinberg.

Like the alternate title says,
_A Guide to Giving &amp; Getting Advice Successfully_, the book is more about
human interactions than about the business of consulting.  And, it is very good.

Weinberg takes us on a stroll through his vast experience as a consultant,
sharing bits of wisdom as he goes along.  He tries to couch each bit of advice
in a catchy slogan, like _The Law of Raspberry Jam_ or _The Orange Juice Test_.
Some of them end up sounding kinda corny: _Rudy's Rutabaga Rule_.

One of the more interesting ones is _The Law of Raspberry Jam_: the wider you
spread it, the thinner it gets.  You can have a lot of influence on one person,
or a little influence on lots of people.  You cannot have it both way.

Another really interesting one comes in the chapter on pricing yourself.
_The Second Law of Pricing_ states that the more they pay you, the more they
love you; and that the less they pay you, the less they respect you.  I have
been thinking for a while now that people care about a thing in proportion to
how much they have to pay for it (for a very loose definition of _pay_).  If you
give them something for free, they won't really care much for it and will let
it wither and die.  If they have to spend resources for it, they will look
after it much more.  _It_ could be a piece of software, or a tool, or a new
practice.
