name: Tidy_First
isbn: 1098151240
isbn13: 9781098151249
title: [Tidy First?](https://a.co/d/8toJJ9p)
author: Kent Beck
publisher: O'Reilly
year: 2023
acquired: 2023-11-21
start: 2024-01-17
stop: 2024-01-21

The most recent book from Kent Beck.  Cleaning up the code to keep quality high
and making it easy to add feature.  "Make the change easy, then make the easy
change."

> [&hellip;] for professional programmers &mdash; that breed of software
> developers with a deep and geeky interest in their craft and in improving work
> in small ways with a deep payoff.
> <footer>Larry Constantine, p. xi</footer>

This idea of a professional programmer is what I mean when I call myself a
software craftsman.  My main preoccupation is the care and craft I put in the
code that I write.  It is different from what is proposed by the Software
Craftsmanship&trade; movement, which is more prescriptive and includes things
like apprenticeships and explicit best practices.

> When you see a comment that says exactly what the code says ,remove it.
> <footer>p. 31</footer>

Back in college, I got to be the teaching assistant in some freshman classes.
This one time, I deducted 1 point out of 100 from a student because their code
had a comment that I felt was not only unnecessary, but actually hindered
readability.  It said:

    c = a + b  // Add up a and b

We laugh about it now, but they are still a little mad at me for only getting
99% on that assignment.  This kind of comment could make sense if it had been
part of a complicated calculation, like "do all this to compute 'a'" and "do all
that to compute 'b'" and "now add them up."  But it wasn't the case for this
student in that assignment.

Back to the book.  For Beck, the goal of software design is:

> Beneficially relating elements.
> <footer>p. 57</footer>

Before tackling the theory of coupling and cohesion, Beck first relates software
design to economic theory and the generation of value.  There is quite a bit of
semantic distance between writing software and options as financial instruments,
and these comparisons always gives me headaches.

> A series of finance-related projects forced me to program basic money-related
> concepts.  Since programming is how I understand the world, I started to
> understand money.
> <footer>p. 65</footer>

I have had a similar experience.  Working in fintech made me better understand
financial operations and appreciate the complexity of payrolls and of trading.
They also helped me better understand how leverage a financial position.
Whether I can apply these lessons successfully for my own finances is another
matter entirely.

> Code review processes [&hellip;] don't distinguish between reversible and
> irreversible changes.  We end up making the same investment with radically
> different payoff profiles.
> <footer>p. 76</footer>

Beck argues that changes for tidying should be so small and so easily reversed
that we shouldn't subject them to code reviews.  It makes sense if we don't want
to delay substantive behavior changes unduly, or require complex PR stacking
(see [Graphite](https://graphite.dev/)).

It's interesting that initial views on coupling were solely centered on changes.
No concept of temporal coupling, or "this piece of code needs this other piece
of code to be present."

The book is a **very quick** read.  It is much too light for its full price.  I
feel many areas could use deeper exploration.  Right now, it's mostly a thought
experiment in Beck's head.  He sees it as self-care for developers, but it could
use delve more into how developers can apply it when the power differentials are
set against them.

Beck often says this book is the first in a series.  It feels strange to read it
when there is no guarantee the series will happen, or how long it will take.
