name: Radical_Candor
isbn: 1250103509
isbn13: 9781250103505
title: [[http://a.co/65Lo0qh][Radical Candor: Be a Kickass Boss Without Losing Your Humanity]]
author: Kim Malone Scott
publisher: St. Martin's Press
year: 2017
acquired: 2017-05-10
start: 2018-09-14
stop: 2018-11-13

A friend of mine recommended I read this book when it came out.  I'm not sure if
there is a hidden message behind this recommendation.

At first, I thought the premise was to have the courage to give criticism, as
long as it's about things that you care about.  This seemed interesting enough.
But it turns out the actual premise is all about _people_, whom you should care
about personally and whom you should challenge directly to help them maximize
their potential.  It is about you as a _boss_ having empathy for your direct
reports and not shying away from the tough discussions.  It's like being a
coach; you have to understand where your players are in their head and steer
them towards a common objective, with means that befit each one.

It is a relatively quick read.  And I was right to think that it would be
somewhat lightweight and anecdotal, much like
_[[SoftwareEngineering/Books.html#Rework][Rework]]_ and
_[[SoftwareEngineering/Books.html#Remote%5FOffice%5FNot%5FRequired][Remote]]_.
For example, she says:

<blockquote>

Ruinous Empathy is responsible for the vast majority of management mistakes I've
seen in my career.

<footer>p.32</footer>
</blockquote>

That's still anecdotal.  She is implying that her career has been long enough
and varied enough that it is representative of all management in all companies
in all countries.  Her career has not been long enough yet to be any of these
things.  The plural of "anecdote" is *not* "data".  All of her stories suffer
from a strong selection bias; she picked them because they confirm her theses.

Contrast this with the following quote by Richard Carrier:

<blockquote>

They didn't answer by interpreting Scripture or reasoning from the armchair or
drawing hasty conclusions from casual observations.  They conducted detailed
scientific experiments to find out.

<footer>[[https://youtu.be/kyrKMIDSVYE?t=18m14s][Skepticon One Redux]]</footer>
</blockquote>

Jason Fried, DHH, and now Kim Scott rely on personal anecdotes that are
susceptible to all kinds of biases.  They talk from a position of privilege that
may not be representative of their readers.  They were able to do things and
take risks that are completely outside the reach of their general audience.

Authors like Allen Bluedorn, Robert Sutton, and Tom DeMarco take greater care to
remove themselves from the equation.  Anecdotes still inform their premises, but
they go to great lengths to confirm them via rigorous studies that use the
scientific method to be as objective as possible.
_Need to verify this for DeMarco._

Radical Candor got mentioned in passing on the
[[http://www.greaterthancode.com/2018/09/12/097-the-job-of-a-manager-with-brandon-hays/][Greater Than Code]]
podcast.

_More to come._




---+++ NOTES:

Boss: guidance, team building, get results. Care personally, challenge directly.

Candor is context-specific (Israel compared to Japan).

Magic quadrants: 3 negative names, 1 positive name. Baiting much?!? "I once read
an article that claimed ..." (p.25) Without a reference, this is sloppy and
possibly misleading. "... as we'll see in later sections" (p.25, all over,
really) Chances are, I won't notice if she never gets back to this. But it
projects an air of authority. She could have put in a one-sentence summary
instead of leaving us hanging.

"... Help people conduct their careers in the way _they_ desire, not in the way
_you_ think they should want to." (p. 47)

We all have periods where we want growth and periods where we want stability. As
boss needs to figure out w where their people are at that point in time.
"Everyone can be excellent at _something_."(p.64) "sometimes two people just
don't work that well together." (p.62)

Letting go of people. Sometimes, it's just a bad fit, cultural or otherwise.
"Don't put people in boxes and leave them there." (p.74)

Can't tell people what to do. I agree with the Google stories; but sure about
Apple stories. But, can you really focus on collaboration when you fear for your
job? "But, if they don't, you may have to change jobs." (p.82). It takes a lot
of courage and not be driven by fear, or complacency, for that matter.

Needs reference for AdWords story on p.78 and Steve Jobs story on p.80.

"Attempting to behave in ways that feel deeply unnatural can make your team feel
less comfortable with you rather than more so. Instead, try to strengthen your
awareness of how your style makes your colleagues feel and work on improving
that dynamic."(p.85) "... if Keynes's genius was locked inside his head, it may
as well not have existed." (p.92)

Inconsistent when giving sources of citations.

"Free at work." Not just you, but your reports too. No chaos, no dictators, no
warlords. Description of Google management is dated: was somewhat true when I
joined, was on its way out by the time I left. Dark corners were growing. Nice
tips on respecting boundaries and acknowledging emotions without letting them
derail everything. I cringe at Radical Candor(tm), would prefer radical candor.

All anecdotes come from leaders in tech: Google, Twitter, Apple, Bill Campbell.
Her sample is highly biased. All these people have to be "disruptors" or else
they won't get any funding. I should re-read "Good Boss, Bad Boss" and compare
their approach.

Ask for criticism, and be prepared to receive it. It is not natural to criticize
your boss. "Is there anything I could do or stop doing that would make it easier
to work with me?" (p.132). Situation, behavior, impact. Ontological humility.

Give feedback immediately, in 2-3 minutes between meetings. Kinda like giving
personal instruction during kendo practice.

Be helpful, be humble, do it immediately and in person, praise in public,
criticize in private, and don't personalize. Especially with your own boss, be
very careful. "Listen, challenge, commit." (p.153)

Gender bias and gender politics. She described how having to choose between
being likeable and being successful hurts women. I would suggest that it hurts
plenty of men too. The fact that some men get away with it doesn't mean we all
get a free pass. I wonder if it's more about (perceived) strong vs. weak than
gender per se.

Performance reviews: write things down, separate fudge from compensation
discussions. "Killer Whale" is like ShopWheel or flamingoes, but everyone
purposes candidates and previous winner chooses. Also "Woops the Monkey" where
people self-submit when they screw up and get instant forgiveness. Don't allow
backstabbing, but be supportive of solutions.

Skip-level meetings, for your direct reports who are themselves managers.

Career conversation: what are people's motivations and where do they want to go?
Growth management: grade people's performance (fairly).

Hiring (no assholes rule), firing (the job sucks for them), and promoting.

Very pragmatic advice for running 1:1s, staff meetings, and reserving think
time. Your mileage may vary.

"Everyone is watching you, but that doesn't mean it's all about you." (p.220)
