name: JavaScript_The_Good_Parts
isbn13: 9780596517748
isbn: 0596517742
title: [JavaScript: The Good Parts](http://amzn.com/0596517742)
author: Douglas Crockford
publisher: O'Reilly
year: 2008
start: 2009-01-23
stop: 2009-02-03

A short book that covers the best parts of the language and tries to avoid the
more questionable aspects.  Too bad it does not look at web programming or
Ajax.

This little gem redeemed JavaScript for me.  A great, quick read.  It really
brought in the functional aspects of JavaScript and the focus on closures.  It
also goes to great pains to differentiate between good features of the language
and bad or outright dangerous ones.  It also has plenty of _railroad diagrams_
to document precisely the grammar of various statements.  These are
interesting, though not strictly necessary.

This book really helps you get into the JavaScript spirit of things.  When I
first approached JavaScript, I was still stuck in the more of
object-orientation you find in other major languages, with classes and such.
But JavaScript has a rather unique take on objects and it pays to reframe your
thinking along its lines of strength.  It really clarified closures and the use
of functions to control scope for me.

<span class="newthought">Additional note:</span> the author did a presentation
at Google on the contents of this book.
[See it on YouTube.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hQVTIJBZook)  I'm sitting
in the first row.  I'm the guy with dark hair and a bald spot on the right.
