name: The_Little_Prince_2
isbn13: 9780156012195
isbn: 1461190460
title: [The Little Prince](http://amzn.com/0156012197)
title: [<i>Le Petit Prince</i>](http://www.amazon.ca/dp/0156013983)
author: Antoine de Saint-Exup&eacute;ry
publisher: Harcourt
year: 2000
year: <i>1943</i>
start: 2019-02-19
stop: 2019-02-19

I need to reread this book more often.

This book is about friendship and what's important in life and it is also about
death and loss.  It tackles very deep issues with disarmingly simple language.
It is very modern in its approach by paring things down to the absolute
essential but at the same time using poetic elements to convey strong emotions
succinctly.

I cannot accept the English verb _to tame_ as the translation of the French
_apprivoiser_ in the text.  _Taming_, to me, implies changing the nature of the
object to render them docile in most circumstances.  In contrast, _apprivoiser_
is about the relationship between two parties, it only changes how they relate
to each other and says nothing about each relates to anyone else.  When the fox
asks the little prince to tame him, he's not asking to be made into a tamed
animal.  He's saying he wants to have a special relationship with this boy.

Some quotes I really liked this time around:

> "Ce que je vois l&agrave; n'est qu'une &eacute;corce.  Le plus important est
> invisible..."
> <footer>chapter XXIV</footer>

> Mais ce sera comme une vielle &eacute;corce abandon&eacute;e.  Ce n'est pas
> triste les vielles &eacute;corces...
> <footer>chapter XXVI</footer>
