name: Apostles_of_Mercy
isbn: 1250274567
isbn13: 9781250274564
title: [Apostles of Mercy](https://a.co/d/fMfR6a1)
author: Lindsay Ellis
publisher: St. Martin's Press
year: 2024
acquired: 2024-06-03
start: 2024-06-08
stop: 2024-07-16

The follow-up to [_Axiom's End_](#Axioms_End) and
[_Truth of the Divine_](#Truth_of_the_Divine).  I am looking forward to where
the story will take us next.  I did have to re-read the end of
_Truth of the Devine_ to remind myself where Ellis had left off.

Ellis hints at the title in the very first epigrah, in a quote from H.G. Wells'
_The War of the Worlds_.

> Soon, inhabited part of your Earth will become uninhabitable.  Water will run
> dry.  Low-lying cities will flood.  Refugees will appeal to wealthier
> countries, and they will be refused entry,  Militarists will gain power with
> the promise of protecting their people from these refugees, and they will use
> their weapons to fight one another.
> <footer>p. 65</footer>

Nikola is being kept against his will, and he is not cooperating with the people
in charge of his _care_.  Paris is trying to make him understand that if he
cooperated, they might develop more empathy towards him and let him have what he
truly wants.

Ampersand is trying to keep a distance between himself and humans he could
potentially help, so they don't become his responsibility.  Obelus had hinted
that Ampersand had inclinations to be an oligarch and would come to rule the
Earth if he stayed long enough.  The reader doesn't have access to his inner
monologue, and we must trust what he says.  But is he reliable?  Could he be
manipulating Cora and everyone else in a long game to install himself as ruler?

> everyone on Earth is beneath him.
> <footer>p. 171</footer>

There are some references to cultural landmarks of 2009: Lady Gaga's _LoveGame_
and Ashton Kutcher's _Punk'd_.  This time around, I found the cultural
references to 2008 nostalgia more annoying than cute.  They always come out of
nowhere and don't contribute to the story.  They're just loud accents that don't
serve any real purpose.

On page 201, when Paris attempts to escape from the physeterine pit, she goes
about creating footholds in manner very reminiscent of a similar scene in the
_[Space: 1999](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space:_1999)_ episode
"[The Full Circle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Full_Circle)".  I used to
watch _Space: 1999_ as a kid, and I had just been re-watching episodes on
YouTube at the same time I was reading this book.  In the episode, Alan Carter
is trapped in a similar pit and tries to dig footholds in the sides to escape.
He doesn't have bones to work with, though, unlike Paris.  It's a funny
coincidence that I read this scene just as I watch this episode that I possibly
haven't seen in fifty years and wouldn't have remembered otherwise.  Maybe there
is a trope here that I am missing.

Nice reversal of the situation when Paris has Nikola act as her translator for
the physeterine juveniles.  But Nikola does not have the diplomatic bend that
Cora has been displaying as she attempts to smooth the communication between
Ampersand and humans.  This book does a better job of breaking up monolithic
perceptions in the various groups.  There are factions among the Amygdaline
Superorganism.  There ae factions among the physeterine (adults vs. juveniles).
There are factions among the humans: countries, CIA, governments, individuals.
And in each case, there are individuals who act contrary to their group's
operating principles.

The high language experiment in Chapter 41 (pp. 314-322) is nicely done.  We
feel both the strangeness from Ampersand's point of view and the anticipation
from Cora, especially in the sexual encounter with Paris.  The writing captures
the intimacy from Cora and detached observation from Ampersand.  It melds them
by using _they_ pronoun throughout.  Both are feeling both points of view.

_More to come._

| Part | | First Chapter | Last Chapter | &Delta; |  %  | | First Page | Last Page | &Delta; |  %  |
|:----:|-|:-------------:|:------------:|:-------:|:---:|-|:----------:|:---------:|:-------:|:---:|
|      | |               |              |         |     | |     i      |    xii    |   12    |     |
|  1   | |       1       |      4       |    4    | 7%  | |     1      |    42     |   42    | 9%  |
|  2   | |       5       |      21      |   17    | 29% | |     43     |    178    |   136   | 30% |
|  3   | |      22       |      47      |   26    | 45% | |    179     |    366    |   188   | 42% |
|  4   | |      48       |      58      |   11    | 19% | |    367     |    446    |   80    | 18% |

page 7
I forgot how the previous book ended.

page 24
Cora is at Columbia. Ampersand/Jude is in Japan.  Enola/Nikola is somewhere in a
US facility.

"what he wants doesn't exist anymore." (p. 13)

"in a galaxy far, far away" (p. 16)

Cora is apprehensive at the thought of merging consciousness with Ampersand,
when he will have full access to her thoughts.

page 43
Cora is terrified of Ampersand's psyche.  She struggles with the limits of
anthropomorphising him.  Paris still has an earbud from Kaveh to talk to
Nikola/Enola.  Enola is dangerous.  Cora has (same sex) _butterflies_ for Paris.
Marisol recounts for Cora the physeterine attack in the Philippines four years
ago and the government cover up.

page 71
Paris gets to meet Nikola, who breaks her nose.  Cora meets with Paris and
confirms her infatuation, which might get reciprocated.  Paris meets again with
Nikola.  He confirms that either humans will destroy themselves through climate
change, or will escape it and prove to the Superorganism they need to be
destroyed.  Cora mentions physeterine to Paris.  Julian and Vasquez move in the
shadows to find out too.  WIIFM.

page 101
Cora is having a full-on relationship with Paris, and she is feeling conflicted
about having to hide her parallel relationship with Ampersand.  Nils gives Cora
pictures of physeterines from Russia (with American date stamps).  The President
is looking to bolster his Defense budget.  Sol Kaplan is back in the picture.
Hints he might want to hook up with Cora.  Filipino government is sharing info
about physeterines.

page 124
Cora and Ampersand go to the Philippines and talk with survivors.  They pray to
St Jude and Ampersand's human name is Jude.  Ampersand tries not to get involved
so he won't feel responsible.  Nikola tells Paris that humans are like insects
and that Ampersand is experimenting on Cora.  Reminder of Ampersand's
inclination to rule. Could he be manipulating Cora in a long con to put himself
as ruler?

page 135
Ampersand operates on the boy after all.  They confess to burying something in
the woods to provoke the"demon".  It was a physeterine juvenile.

page 155
Ampersand explains the physeterine life cycle.  He explains how he left the
Superorganism and gained his Similar body.  He was traumatized by his
experience of a physeterine attack.  Cora begins to understand that his
consciousness did not originate in the body that she is seeing.  Cora breaks up
with Paris.  Luciana prepares to move Nikola, but email exchanges could clue the
physeterines to where they are going.

page 155
I predict the physeterines will attack Nikola in transit and either they capture
Paris, or Nikola kills them and he captures Paris.

page 179
It's a bingo!  Finally, some action, 30% in.  Physeterines attack the plane with
Nikola and the base with Ampersand.  Cora runs a diversion, Ampersand says they
weren't there for him.  Nikola saves Paris, but she ends up taken by
physeterines anyway.  Nikola's fate is unknown.

page 217
No humans in the plane wreckage.  Luciana + pilots were saved by physiterines.
Esperas + Brako try to negotiate with Ampersand and Cora feels in the middle.
Physiterines have Paris and Nikola.  Paris escapes in the jungle.  Castle Bravo
trips a landmine, helped by Paris, rescued by Tsar Bomba and Trinity.  Paris is
recaptured.  Did Nikola plan with the physeterines to attack the plane?

page 261
Alternating between Paris interacting with the physeterines, especially the
juveniles, and Cora + CIA looking for traces of physeterines as they search for
Paris.  Sol is getting more and more inappropriate.  Nils is trying to get
closer to his daughter.  She feels she has to guards against both, or does she?
Physeterines feel they should inherit the Earth, since humans are poisoning with
radiation, mines.

page 345
Paris befriends Durian and Coconut.  Cora and Sol track down physeterine
encampments.  Paris offers possible sanctuary to Durian.  Durian captures Cora,
revealing location to Ampersand.  Success with high language: relive Cora and
Paris having sex, relive capture by physeterines.  Ampersand captures Durian,
preps him for Esperas.  Esperas is surprised high language worked with humans.

page 345
The high language experiment on pp. 314-322 is nicely done.  We feel both the
strangeness from Ampersand's point of view and the anticipation from Cora,
especially in the sexual encounter with Paris.  The writing captures the
intimacy from Cora and detached observation from Ampersand.  It melds them by
using they pronoun throughout.  Both are feeling both points of view.

page 367
Cora and Ampersand have a heart-to-heart about their relationship.  Esperas
wants to negotiate with the physeterines, but Ampersand thinks it won't work.
The physeterines use EMP to capture and kill Brako.  They inject Paris with
something.  Plague?  They were debating the need to kill all humans before
Esperas interrupted.

page 408
Paris is infected.  U.S. military destroys physeterine stores, declaring then
hostiles.  Paris gets Brako's core for Nikola.  Sol disables the physeterine
ship.  (And dies?)  Ampersand subdues Nikola, who offers revenge.  Paris looks
for ways to die less painful than hemorrhagic fever.

page 448
Nikola subdues all physeterines.  Cora at first shares Ampersand's rage, but
comes to empathize with them.  Nikola spares them to find a cure for Paris.  He
pledges his "love" to Paris.  Cora exposes Nils corruption.  Sol is alive, in
tractions.  Cora will place a request for him.  Physeterines are holed up in New
Zealand.  Cora + Ampersand reflect on why can't they be the ones to plot the
course of humanity?
