name: Radical_Candor
isbn: 1250103509
isbn13: 9781250103505
title: [Radical Candor: Be a Kickass Boss Without Losing Your Humanity](http://a.co/65Lo0qh)
author: Kim Malone Scott
publisher: St. Martin's Press
year: 2017
acquired: 2017-05-10
start: 2018-09-14
stop: 2018-11-13

A friend of mine recommended I read this book when it came out.  I'm not sure
there wasn't a hidden message behind this recommendation.

At first, I thought the premise was to have the courage to give criticism, as
long as it's about things that you care about.  This seemed interesting enough.
But it turns out the actual premise is all about _people_: you should care about
them personally, and you should challenge them directly, so they can maximize
their potential.  It is about you as a _boss_ having empathy for your direct
reports and not shying away from the tough discussions.  It's like being a
coach: you have to understand where your players are in their head and steer
them towards a common objective, with motivators specific to each one.

> [...] Help people conduct their careers in the way _they_ desire, not in the
> way _you_ think they should want to.
> <footer>page 47</footer>

It is a relatively quick read.  And I was right to think that it would be
somewhat lightweight and anecdotal, much like
[_Rework_](SoftwareEngineering/Books.html#Rework) and
[_Remote_](SoftwareEngineering/Books.html#Remote_Office_Not_Required).
For example, she says:

> Ruinous Empathy is responsible for the vast majority of management mistakes
> I've seen in my career.
> <footer>page 32</footer>

That's still anecdotal.  She is implying that her career has been long enough
and varied enough that it is representative of all management in all companies
in all countries.  Her career has not been long enough yet to be any of these
things.  The plural of _anecdote_ is **not** _data_.  All of her stories suffer
from a strong selection bias; she picked them because they confirm her
hypotheses.

Contrast these with the following quote by Richard Carrier:

> They didn't answer by interpreting Scripture or reasoning from the armchair or
> drawing hasty conclusions from casual observations.  They conducted detailed
> scientific experiments to find out.
> <footer>[Skepticon One Redux](https://youtu.be/kyrKMIDSVYE?t=18m14s)</footer>

Jason Fried, DHH, and now Kim Scott, rely on personal anecdotes that are
susceptible to all kinds of biases.  They talk from a position of privilege that
may not be representative of their readers.  They were able to do things and
take risks that may be completely outside the reach of their general audience.

Authors like Allen Bluedorn, Robert Sutton, and Tom DeMarco take greater care to
remove themselves from the equation.  Anecdotes still inform their premises, but
they go to great lengths to confirm them via rigorous studies that use the
scientific method to be as objective as possible.
_Need to verify this for DeMarco._

Kim Scott's sloppiness shows up in small phrases like "I once read an article
that claimed ..." or "... as we'll see in later sections".  It projects an air
of authority without giving any foundation for it.  She doesn't do it all the
time, sometimes she does give references.  But it weakens her case every time
she does.  The stories about AdWords, and those about Steve Jobs, could easily
have had references.  And while I can attest to some of the things she says
about Google (I was never at Apple, so I cannot speak to that), some dates would
have been helpful because I know things have changed over the years and it may
not all be true anymore.

Aside from that, she does make some good points.  Her approach is very humane.

> Sometimes two people just don't work that well together.
> <footer>page 62</footer>

> Everyone can be excellent at _something_.
> <footer>page 64</footer>

> Don't put people in boxes and leave them there.
> <footer>page 74</footer>

The humanity comes through especially when she recommends caution before being
too candid with your boss.  It is also there when discussing the need to fire
people because of performance problems.  They may not be bad people; it's just
that the job sucks for them.

Kim Scott mentions giving feedback immediately, in those 2-3 minutes between
meetings.  This is very much like when I give personal instruction during kendo
practice.  The more immediate, the better.  But in the middle of practice, I
have to be selective of the one actionable piece of advice I have time to give.

She describes a tool for giving recognition, dubbed the "Killer Whale", that
resembles what we did at ShopWell with the ShopWheel, or at Directly with
flamingoes, but everyone proposes candidates and the previous winner chooses.
But she also had "Woops the Monkey" where people self-submit for messing up and
they get instant forgiveness.

Kim Scott also briefly touches on gender bias and gender politics. She describes
how having to choose between being likable and being successful hurts women.  I
would like to suggest that it hurts plenty of men, too.  The fact that some men
get away with it doesn't mean we all get a free pass.  I wonder if it could be
about being perceived as strong vs. weak, instead of being about gender per se.

I'll end with a few more quotable bits.

> [...] if Keynes's genius was locked inside his head, it may as well not have
> existed.
> <footer>page 92</footer>

> Is there anything I could do or stop doing that would make it easier to work
> with me?
> <footer>page 132</footer>

> Everyone is watching you, but that doesn't mean it's all about you.
> <footer>page 220</footer>

<span class="newthought">Note:</span> Radical Candor got a passing mention in an
episode of the
[Greater Than Code](http://www.greaterthancode.com/2018/09/12/097-the-job-of-a-manager-with-brandon-hays/)
podcast.

<span class="newthought">Note:</span> On 2018-12-17, after having read about
candor and caring, I came upon an article titled
[The Real Roots of American Rage](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2019/01/charles-duhigg-american-anger/576424/)
in _The Atlantic_.  It talks about how anger can be a useful
emotion, helping us feel heard when we are angry and focusing our attention when
someone is angry at us.  But it is also easy for less well-meaning people to use
our anger to manipulate us and even direct us against our best self-interest.
