name: Le_rideau
isbn: 207077435X
isbn: 0060841958
title: [Le rideau](http://www.amazon.ca/dp/207077435X)
title: [<i>The Curtain</i>](http://amzn.com/0060841958)
author: Milan Kundera
publisher: Gallimard
year: 2005
start: 2005-08-24
stop: 2005-09-02

I love reading Kundera.  He opens my mind to the arts and makes
me want to know so much more.  This book is no different.

In this essay, Kundera explores further the nature of his art
form: the novel.  He starts with an interesting idea that nothing
happens in a vacuum and that art pieces take their value from their
place in a continuum.  If a composer, today, wrote a piece exactly
like Beethoven, it would be worthless.  The same piece, written in
the days of Beethoven, would be a masterpiece.  The music continuum
has moved forward and a given piece of music has a different value
depending on where it is located in that continuum.  In the book,
Kundera will try to map the continuum of the artform of the novel
and highlight some of its landmarks.

The first roadblock is that the history of an art is not tied to
that of any one nation.  The evolution of a given art moves between
countries without consideration for their individual national
histories.  But each culture tends to highjack its artists in order
to affirm itself in the face of the world.  Kundera calls it
_provincialism_, or narrow-mindedness.

And this is where Kundera's genius starts to show.  He grew up
in Czechoslovakia and later emigrated to France.  He knows what it
is like to be part of a culture that plays a small part in the world
of literature, and to join a culture that plays a large part in it.  Each
sees itself differently in how it relates to the rest of the world,
and in how it deals with both its own artists and artists of other nations.

When he describes the _narrow-mindedness of the small_, I
can hear echoes of opinions expressed in my native Qu&eacute;bec;
even though he is talking about Czechoslovakia, he could just as
well be talking about the people and attitudes that I grew
up with.  Small nations hang on to their culture so they don't get
swallowed by their larger context.  Their artists are what keeps
them distinct.  For an artist to leave their narrow context in order to take
part in the greater world is nothing short of treason.

Now that I live in the United States, I can also relate to what
he calls the _narrow-mindedness of the great_.  After all,
the US is a country that has what it calls a "World Series" with the US as the
only participating nation.  :-)  Great nations come to think that their
culture is sufficient; after all, why would anyone need anything more?

From there, Kundera proceeds down the road of the evolution of
the novel as an art form through the ages.  Starting with Rabelais
and Cervantes, and going through a series of authors from the four
corners of the western world, he explores the characteristics that
are unique to the novel.  Novels explore human nature by looking at
the mundane in the characters and showing them as products of their
surroundings.  This is in contrast to the preceding literature
where characters were predestined by their origin and dealt with
profound moral choices.

At one point, Kundera comments on the nature of tragedy.  Two
characters hold on to two sides of a same coin and neither can win
without destroying the other, thereby bringing their own downfall.  Each
side becomes both justified and guilty at the same time. There lies the
essence of tragedy, and with it, the possibility of reconciliation
when both sides accept their share of guilt.  It shows the relativistic
nature of what we hold to be true.  This way of thinking stopped after World
War II; manichaeism reasserted its place and the world became black
and white again, out went any relativism, and it took guilt and
any hope for reconciliation with it.  From then on, it's been us versus
them.

The last thing I want to cover is Kundera's treatment of
bureaucracy through the works of Adalbert Stifter, Max Weber, and
Franz Kafka.  In a bureaucracy, the employee is not expected to
understand the problems his office is dealing with, but rather to
blindly execute the orders given to him.  Stifter's character
cannot help dealing with things according to their nature and
therefore finds himself ill-suited for being part of a bureaucracy.  By the
time we get to Kafka, the bureaucracy has become omnipresent and
there is no escaping it anymore.  Here, I find a parallel with my work
as a software engineer.  I am actively fleeing bureaucracy in my
work life; I want to deal with problems, not blindly follow
instructions that come from someone else.  It is interesting to
see how people that are otherwise well-intentioned can nonetheless
fall into the trap of bureaucracy and create these large structures
from which all thinking has been removed.

Kundera is much more eloquent than me, so get this book and read
it for yourself.
