name: God_Human_Animal_Machine
isbn: 0525562710
isbn13: 9780525562719
title: [God Human Animal Machine: Technology, Metaphor, and the Search for Meaning](https://www.amazon.com/God-Human-Animal-Machine-Technology/dp/0525562710)
author: Meghan O'Gieblyn
publisher: Anchor Books
year: 2021
acquired: 2023-06-18
start: 2023-06-22
stop: 2023-07-21

I received this book as a Father's Day gift.  It's an exploration of our
attempts to explain consciousness.  It covers rational thinkers from Descartes
to today, but also some of the author early religious learnings.

Starting with Ren&eacute; Descartes and dualism, we've separated the mind from
the material world and our scientific exploration has consistently removed
enchantment from the world around us.  What used to be attributed to
supernatural explanations could be explained by purely natural means.  With a
blind spot when it came to explaining the mind itself.

> it is precisely this inner experience that has become impossible to prove
> &mdash; at least from a scientific standpoint.  While we know that mental
> phenomena are linked somehow to the brain, it is not at all clear how they
> are, or why. [&hellip;] there is no way to account for how it arises from or
> is associated with these processes.
> <footer>p. 19</footer>

After dualism, the book explores transhumanism, where authors like Ray Kurzweil
(who now works at Google on natural language processing) ask what would happen
if consciousness was incarnated in another body, whether biological or
artificial.  In either case, if we copy or clone a mind, which one is the _real_
individual?  Where does identity reside?  Is it more than just a pattern in
matter, much like a river is a pattern of water flowing and not the water
itself.  O'Gieblyn sees the mind resurrected in a machine as a modern taken on
theologians' resurrection of the body.  New ideas are rehash of older ones.  The
transhumanists' singularity is the alchemists' philosopher stone and the early
Christians' resurrection.  It is a restatement of their sublimated religious
past.

Transhumanism also brings an idea of fusing human minds harmoniously.  O'Gieblyn
even brings up Wikipedia, where authorship disappears and the result is a
distillation of shared human knowledge.  But she misses that Wikipedia is not
authoritative because anyone can change anything.  No accountability means bad
actors can, and will, turn any communal work to shit.  Just look at any social
media platforms.  The Internet risks pulling us into a global hive mind, where
parts will be subsumed into the whole.

From the duality of mind and matter to copying minds, we next get to minds as
emergent behavior of matter.  The old stories of Jewish golems show our
fascination with imbuing inanimate matter with consciousness.  There is an idea
that emergent behavior could lead to true A.I.

There is an interesting parallel between how matter somehow gives rise to the
mind and how in Physics, the aggregate behavior of particles at the quantum
level can give rise to the reality we are experiencing.  Can our understanding
of quantum superposition and wave function collapse help us make sense of how
the mind arises out of matter?  Would the multiverse hypothesis, with infinite
coexisting universes, provide a better model?  These questions go unanswered.
Bosch's simulation theory is interesting insofar as simulations can be nested
into one another, to infinite regression.

There is an interesting foray into the opposite line of inquiry.  Panpsychism is
the opposite of dualism.  All matter is infused with consciousness, and enough
of this consciousness is in humans to result in our self-awareness.  Humans are
special, once again.  Smells of Deepak Chopra's woo woo.

> Perhaps perception could extend beyond itself, beyond language, to touch the
> noumenal, the thing in itself.
> <footer>p. 187</footer>

This leads to idealism, where it is consciousness that is real and the material
world is the illusion.  But science keeps breaking these model.  Science has
proven again and again that it is accurate in reflecting an objective reality,
and that our minds can easily succumb to illusions.

> As the science fiction writer Philip K. Dick once put it, reality is "that
> which, when you stop believing in it, doesn't go away."
> <footer>p. 119</footer>

The book delves a little deeper into A.I. and its recent achievements, but it
fails to show how our own biases enter these A.I. systems through the training
sets that we use to create them.  This can reinforce these biases in society if
we put too much trust in A.I. systems.  Machine learning models are so complex
and so removed from typical human reasoning that it becomes impossible to verify
their reasoning and the actual validity of their answers.

> These systems do not target specific races or genders, or even take these
> factors into account.  But they often zero in on other information &mdash; zip
> codes, income, previous encounters with police &mdash; that are freighted with
> historic inequality.
> <footer>p. 237</footer>

Daniel Solove thinks of modern information technologies less like George
Orwell's _Nineteen Eighty-Four_ and more like Franz Kafka's _The Trial_.  There
is a lack of transparency and explainability, despite what these companies are
claiming.  But there is no nefarious hidden agenda.

Calvinists want us to accept God's will without question, as it is above the
comprehension of mortals.  Modern technologists want us to accept the AI
algorithms conclusions without question, as they are beyond our human
comprehension.  A.I. wanted to forge a god, and it recreated the one from our
mysticist past.

> Just as according to Christianity we humans cannot understand God and His
> plan, so Dataism declares that the human brain cannot fathom the new master
> algorithms.
> <footer>Yuval Noah Karari, p. 211</footer>

In addition to the issue of identity, there is also the problem of free will.
If the world is deterministic, how can we have free will?  Statistical
predictions work on large aggregates, hinting that the world could be
deterministic.  Personally, I lean more towards chaos theory and a variation on
the uncertainty principle.  Individuals cannot be predicted with absolute
certainty, but large groups follow what amounts to strange attractors.  (I
realize this sounds somewhat like the psychohistory from Isaac Asimov's
_Foundation_ novels).

The book ends with a discussion of viral media while in the middle of a real
pandemic.  The pandemic did show that we were willing to sacrifice the economy
to preserve human lives, up to a point.  We end up back at anthropocentrism: we
may not be important or the center of the universe, but we're still all that
matters, really.

> governments opportunistically use crises and public emergencies to increase
> their power and erode constitutional rights.
> <footer>p. 260</footer>

O'Gieblyn always writes from her own personal perspective.  Some of the
anecdotes are nice, and she brings a unique point of view when she relates
findings from theology to "modern" ideas in A.I.  However, "I find her lack of
objectivity disturbing."

The bibliography is great.  It includes a wide array of references from
classical thinkers, the world of Physics, modern computing, and modern thinkers
too.  I'm glad I could recognize and relate to many of the names, including
Daniel Dennett.
