name: The_Pragmatic_Programmer
isbn: 0135957052
isbn13: 9780135957059
title: [The Pragmatic Programmer, 20<sup>th</sup> Anniversary Edition](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0135957052)
author: Dave Thomas
author: Andy Hunt
publisher: Addison-Wesley
year: 1999
year: 2019
acquired: 2020-03-19
start: 2024-03-29
stop: 2024-04-30

This book offers a good summary of the gestalt of software development around
the year 2000.  That was the time when agile methodologies were on the rise.
There was a push for more practical approaches based on practices taken from the
field, instead of more academic exercises coming from tool vendors.  I have read
many books and articles about agile software development, and about eXtreme
Programming in particular.  As a result, I was already very familiar with most
of the advice from Thomas and Hunt, and this is why I have waited so long to
read this book.

This review will be short.  I found myself nodding along in agreement as I was
reading the book, so I didn't take very many notes.  I am agreeing with pretty
much everything they have to say.  A few things still managed to stand out.

I like that the code examples use a wide array of languages.  The Anniversary
Edition includes some modern languages like Elixir.

I liked the discussion of event-based systems and programming as a data
transformation pipeline.  I have done some of these in Ruby, in JavaScript, and
in Java using the Streams API.  I'm a little more guarded when it comes to
coding finite state machines.

Their discussion of estimation and risk management reminded me a little of Tom
DeMarco's [_Waltzing with Bears_](#Waltzing_with_Bears).

One piece of advice is to maintain an engineering daybook, similar to lab notes.
I did do that when I was working at Gusto, using a physical notebook.  It was
fun to write down everything I was doing, but the physical notebook was a little
difficult to search through.  It got worse when I filled it up and started a
second, and then third notebook.  Now, I use Google Docs instead.  I cannot
doodle impromptu diagrams anymore, but searching is actually feasible.

I have often experienced the friction between marketing and engineering.  The
sales and marketing side makes promises to close a deal without consulting
engineering, and now there is tension about who is responsible for managing
expectations, if it's at all possible.

> it is equally unprofessional to promise impossible time scales and to cut
> basic engineering corners to meet a deadline.
> <footer>p. 12</footer>

I worked at a place where teams were constantly in flux.  Developers would
happily work away on a project as part of team A, only come in the next day to
find out they were now reassigned to team B.  Ten days later, they might find
themselves on team C.  I always found it odd, and it was hard to fall into a
rhythm.  I'm glad the authors recommend against it.

> A pragmatic team is small, under 10-12 or so members.  Members come and go
> rarely.  Everyone knows everyone well, trusts each other, and depends on each
> other.
> <footer>p. 264</footer>

Thomas and Hunt have a nice piece of advice to help a sense of belonging within
a team or project.

> When you start a project, come up with a name for it, ideally something
> off-the-wall.  [&hellip;]  Spend 30 minutes coming up with a zany logo, and
> use it.  Use your team's name liberally when talking with people.  It sounds
> silly, but it gives your team an identity to build on, and the world something
> memorable to associate with your work.
> <footer>p. 267</footer>

It makes me think of how each mission at NASA has their own name and badge.

Throughout, the topics heavily cross-reference each other, either with explicit
"Related" sections or inlined in the text.  This is very useful to keep related
concepts together, even when they are presented far from each other due to the
book's layout.

The ending is rather aspirational and tells developers they are in control of
the software of tomorrow.  Some of the less code-driven advice could be quite
generic and could have used more concrete examples.  When you're stuck, saying
"Go do something else for a bit" is rather generic and does not always work.

A few things have gained popularity since the Anniversary Edition came out.  For
instance, keeping secrets in a Secrets Manager instead of environment config
files.  I am also curious if they would do anything differently in the face of
remote work.  And what about the impact of AI and generative tools like Copilot?
The field of software development is evolving very quickly.  The vast majority
of the book is good advice, but even the update is showing signs of strain.  I'm
curious to see how well it will hold up for the 40<sup>th</sup> anniversary.
