name: The_Glass_Menagerie
isbn: 0811202208
isbn13: 9780811202206
title: [The Glass Menagerie](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0811202208)
author: Tennessee Williams
publisher: New Directions
year: 1945
year: 1966
year: 1970
start: 2020-10-05
stop: 2020-10-11

I read this back in High School.  My teenage son asked to read it recently, and
it looked like a nice opportunity to revisit it for myself.

The intro made me  think of _[The Great Gatsby](#The_Great_Gatsby)_.

Mother lives in a nostalgic, idealized version of her past as a Southern belle.
The daughter, Laura, is withdrawn and lives in a fantasy of her own making.  The
son, Tom, lives a stifled live, both at home and at work, and dreams of open
adventure, like the father who left sixteen years prior.  The play is his memory
of the last moments he lived with his mother and sister, before he abandoned
them in his turn.  Each is a fragile piece of glass that gets knocked over when
reality comes barging in, in the form of Jim, the gentleman caller.

I remember seeing the play in French.  My classmate's mother was the director of
the play, and a few of us got to go see it.  Qu&eacute;bec actress Denise
Filiatrault played the role of the mother.  When I read the play, I always
imagine Jim, the gentleman caller, as a compassionate soul.  He gets carried
away by the moment, but seems to well-intentioned towards Laura.  When I saw the
play, Jim was more cruel and played with Laura's sentiments in a rather careless
manner.  I remember writing to the director about it; she validated my point of
view, but was sticking to her interpretation.
