name: The_Lovely_Bones
isbn: 0316044938
title: [The Lovely Bones](http://amzn.com/0316044938)
author: Alice Sebold
publisher: Back Bay Books
year: 2002
start: 2010-01-23
stop: 2010-02-06

A touching story about loss.  Susie, the main character, has to adjust to loss
of life and a new existence in _her heaven_.  The people she knew and whom she
left behind have to adjust to their loss of Susie.  It's a very interesting look
at grief and how different people cope with loss.

The author's concept of a personal heaven was very intriguing.  It is
unfortunate that she didn't explore it further.  How does it operate?  Under
what rules does it run?  It appears to be multi-layered, with some form of
progression, as demonstrated by the short interlude with Susie's grand-father.
I understand that she wanted to focus more on what happens to the living, and
I would have liked it better if she had kept the communication channel between
the dead and the living strictly one-way.  As the years go by and Susie follows
what's happening to the people she knew, does she mature too?  Either she is
very mature for a 14 years-old or else she continues to grow through death.
Either way, the voice of the novel is clearly that of a 30-something, just like
the author, for better or worse.

The characters are rather one-dimensional.  They set out on one track and follow
it down the novel.  People who meet at 14-15 years old end up married to each
other?  Gimme a break.  Otherwise, I did like her portrayal of teenagers: they
are not overly prude, still preoccupied with sex, but with enough self-respect
not to be too promiscuous.
