name: The_Enchantress_of_Florence
isbn: 0375504338
title: [The Enchantress of Florence](http://amzn.com/0375504338)
author: Salman Rushdie
publisher: Random House
year: 2008
start: 2008-06-18
stop: 2008-08-07

I've been hearing about Salman Rushdie even since
[_The Satanic Verses_](http://amzn.com/0812976711), but never really got
around to reading his work.  Milan Kundera speaks very highly of him.  I got
this book when Rushdie came to speak at Google.  He mentioned that the action
took place in part in Renaissance Florence and that he even managed to include
Dracula in the novel because of the period in which it is set.  This is
promising, since I read quite a bit about politics during the Renaissance and
also about Vlad the Impaler, aka Dracula.

The novel opens at the court of Mughal Emperor Akbar, a high point of Indian
cultural development.  This is a area where I knew precious little and it was
very interesting to educate myself via this novel.  Like Umberto Eco's novels,
this one was researched very meticulously and the reader can get all kinds of
little historical bits and pieces from it.  It also uses historical figures for
the main characters and adds elements of the author's invention in between the
pieces from the historical record.  Somewhat like Maurice Druon did in his cycle
_Les rois maudits_, but whereas Druon wants to write a novel about History,
Rushdie uses History as a backdrop against which he paints his own story.

The novel worked very well for me until near the very end, when part of the
action moves to the New World and tries to use non-sensical metaphysics to
explain temporal anomalies.  That last bit reminded me of Eco's
[_The Island of the Day Before_](http://amzn.com/0156030373) where the main
character tries to go back in time by crossing the date line, under the belief
that the date line has strange metaphysical properties.  But the remainder of
the novel is quite excellent.
