name: Component_Based_Rails_Applications
isbn: 0134774582
isbn13: 9780134774589
title: [Component-Based Rails Applications: Large Domains Under Control](https://www.informit.com/store/component-based-rails-applications-large-domains-under-9780134774589)
author: Stephan Hagemann
publisher: Addison-Wesley
year: 2018
acquired: 2020-09-08
start: 2020-09-08
stop: 2020-09-26

Ruby on Rails's
_[convention over configuration](https://rubyonrails.org/doctrine/)_ lets you
tap a lot of functionality with a small amount of code.  If you follow the
patterns, it will figure things out for you.  Everything can reference anything,
to make it even easier on developers.  It works really well at smaller scales,
but it fails to provide strong boundaries for larger teams to stay decoupled for
one another.

Someone had mentioned Rails _engines_ to me before, but the documentation is
hard to break through.  This book by Hagemann does a much better job of
explaining how gems, plugins, and engines can provide a way to decouple parts of
the code.  With some careful attention to dependencies in `Gemfile`s, you can
use them to provide the strong boundaries I said were missing earlier.
_Components_ give you all the freedoms of Rails internally and provide a degree
of isolation across their boundaries.  But in doing so, we are going against the
grain of how Rails wants to do things.

Extracting components from an existing application  can feel like hacking, at
times.  Hagemann sometimes takes it a step further,  like his shell scripts that
build and run tests.  These parts of the text would  have benefited from more
explanation of how Rails wants things to behave and how the "hacks" work with it
or against it.  For example, when shoehorning the application into Heroku (and
nice touch with Cloud Foundry).  We use components to help with maintenance, but
we are also paying a tax with all this hacking.  We need to keep this tax well
below the gains from the component-based architecture.

Hagemann's definition of what constitutes a component is a little academic and
arbitrary.  For instance, he insists on the absence of circular dependencies.
Ruby's Bundler can't handle circular dependencies, but that doesn't mean that an
arbitrary definition of components requires it too.  There are a few claims like
this that could have used more justification.

I did appreciate how, in Chapter 5, Hagemann builds out a one-time script to
extract a component.  By getting the script to do everything needed for the
extraction, he can work on impediments while development of the app is still
going on.  Once the script is ready, you only need to _freeze_ development long
enough to run the script.

A book tied to a specific technology is at the mercy of evolution.  This book
uses an early version of Rails 5, and we're at Rails 6, now.  After more than
an hour trying to get the assets in an early example to behave, I had to give up
and [open a ticket in the book's GitHub](https://github.com/shageman/component-based-rails-applications-book/issues/11).

The book has a quick example of how components can fit in
[hexagonal architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hexagonal_architecture_(software))
or in [DCI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data,_context_and_interaction).  In
doing so, it shows how these architectures go even more against the grain of
Rails.  They require a lot of boilerplate to fully isolate the concerns, and use
a lot of data transfer objects.  Rails specifically aims for the opposite: let
the framework handle the drudgery, so you can focus on the fun part.  DHH wrote
a lengthy [complaint against hexagonal architecture](https://dhh.dk/2014/test-induced-design-damage.html).

I now work with Stephan Hagemann at Gusto.  Components are one tool in our
toolbox as we look for ways to modularize our monoliths and unleash the
potential of our developers.
