name: The_Children_of_Hurin
isbn13: 9780618894642
isbn: 0618894640
title: [The Children of H&uacute;rin](http://amzn.com/0618894640)
author: J.R.R. Tolkien
author: Christopher Tolkien
publisher: Houghton Mifflin
year: 2007
start: 2007-05-30
stop: 2007-06-10

Christopher Tolkien strikes again.  This time, he worked really hard
to limit the editorial work, like he did in
[_The Silmarillion_](http://amzn.com/0618391118),
and to present a cohesive text out of all the different versions found
in _The History of Middle-Earth_.  Mission accomplished.  The
introduction does a half-decent job of setting the stage from all the
material leading to the story of T&uacute;rin, so that the main text
can proceed without to much exposition.  But I'm not sure how much of
this intro would actually stick with a reader unfamiliar with Tolkien's
tales of the Elder Days.  Even I had to refer to the map fairly often
to keep up with the development of the story.

As I was reading this book, I sometimes went back to my other
Tolkien books to compare versions.  It was nice to see all the details
for some of the scenes, instead of the summarized version in
_The Silmarillion_.  Like the one with Saeros, for instance.

I also liked the writing style too; it suggests old heroic tales and
myths.  For instance:

> Huor, his brother was tall, the tallest of all the Edain save his own son Tuor
> only, and a swift runner; but if the race were long and hard H&uacute;rin
> would be the first home, for he ran as strongly at the end of the course as at
> the beginning.
