name: Modern_Java_in_Action
isbn: 1617293563
isbn13: 9781617293566
title: [Modern Java in Action](https://www.manning.com/books/modern-java-in-action)
author: Raoul-Gabriel Urma
author: Mario Fusco
author: Alan Mycroft
publisher: Manning
year: 2018
acquired: 2018-06-11
start: 2019-05-04
stop: 2019-07-31

I had been coding in Groovy for the previous 10 years and I needed to get up to
speed on the new Java idioms, like lambdas and streams.

The book does a good job of covering the Stream API and how it benefit from
lambdas and method references.  I like how it can infer the functional interface
of a lambda expression based on context (see Figure 3.5 on page 67).  It is an
interesting alternative to the more loosely typed approach in Groovy.

I find it interesting how streams use a lazy implementation and how their
pipelines are demand-driven.  It makes infinite streams possible, with iterate
(takes a `UnaryFunction`) and generate (takes a `Supplier`) variations.  It does
make it more difficult to have one pipeline compute multiple results, though.  I
couldn't find a justification as to why there are specialized versions for
`int`, `long`, and `double`, but not for `float` (or `byte`, for that matter).
The contracts for `Collector` and `Spliterator` are rather complex.

I'm not keen on using `Optional` all over the place, especially in light of
Groovy's null-safe dereferencing operators `?.` and `.*`.  It does help with
creating call chains, but the mental load is quite severe.  Combine it with
`CompleteableFuture` and you have to think really hard about what is going on
for every method call.

All these new APIs rely **a lot** on static helper methods.  I'd need some actual
practice using them to understand better how to unit test code that's using
them.

I was hopeful for the Flow API and reactive programming, but there is still a
lot of wiring up to do.  I was hoping for something closer to event-based models
where publishers and subscribers don't know about each other, and how you can
get temporal decoupling too, where they don't have to be available at the same
time.

I don't see the need for the Java module system at this time.

The parts on functional programming were interesting, but I wouldn't want to do
it in Java.  Functional languages handle these concepts much better.  Still, in
order to use streams well, you need to know about pure functions and write code
with no side-effects.

The authors **very** frequently refer back to previous sections.  It gets a little
annoying after a while.  But I can see how it can be helpful if someone starts
reading in the middle of the book, chasing after a specific topic, for them to
understand where the current context is coming from.

The tone can seem at times a little condescending towards more theoretical
approaches, like pure mathematics.  It definitely favors more practical
experimentations.

One quick quote that gave me pause:

> Programmer efficiency is often more important than small differences in
> execution time.
> <footer>p. 458</footer>

This is dangerous advice if you don't give more context.  How often is that code
executed?  How critical is it for its enclosing code to be responsive?  I agree
that 90% of the time, programmer efficiency will win.  But you must not lose
sight of that other 10%.
