name: Six_Easy_Pieces
isbn: 0465025277
isbn13: 9780465025275
title: [Six Easy Pieces: Essentials of Physics Explained by Its Most Brilliant Teacher](http://a.co/gGYpRvg)
author: Richard P. Feynman
publisher: Basic Books
year: 1961-1963
year: 2011
acquired: 2017-10-14
start: 2020-05-30
stop: 2020-06-28

I while back, I bought
[a book that introduced math topics](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1591026865) to
the lay person.  This looked like it could do the same for physics.  And by none
other than Richard Feynman himself.

Feynman goes for a more intuitive approach and avoids any complex mathematics.
His explanations and examples are strikingly clear.  The jiggling of atoms
explain the difference between solid, liquid, and gaseous states.  Changing
arrangements explain chemical reactions, like burning carbon.  Everything is
made out of atoms, with patterns that defy the imagination.

I struggled through the chapter on the conservation of energy.  One take-away is
that we can explain limits in nature using reversible machines, even though
there are no reversible machines in nature.  The chapters on gravitation and
quantum mechanics were exceedingly clear.  The chapter on how physics relates to
the other sciences was a lot of fun.  So, too, the chapter on gravitation.

> Tycho Brahe had an idea that was different from anything proposed by the
> ancients [...] that to find something out, it is better to perform some
> careful experiments than to carry on deep philosophical arguments.
> <footer>p. 90</footer>

Tycho Brahe took measurements, Kepler deduced laws from these measurements,
Galileo figured out inertia, and Newton formulated the law of gravitation (which
was later refined by Einstein).

I really like how Feynman repeatedly states the limits of science.  There are
many things that we simply do not know.  For now.  There may be things we will
never know, but many phenomena in the past were deemed inexplicable, only to be
explained later.

> It is important to realize that in physics today, we have no knowledge of what
> energy _is_.
> <footer>p. 71</footer>

> the principle of _inertia_ &mdash; if something is moving, with nothing
> touching it and completely undisturbed, it will go on forever, coasting at a
> uniform speed in a straight line.  (_Why_ does it keep on coasting?  We do not
> know, but that is the way it is.)
> <footer>p. 93</footer>

> All we have done is to describe _how_ the earth moves around the sun, but we
> have not said _what makes it go._
> <footer>p. 107</footer>

> No one has since given any machinery.
> <footer>p. 107</footer>

> Things on a very small scale behave like nothing that you have any direct
> experience about.
> <footer>p. 116</footer>

> Because atomic behavior is so unlike ordinary experience, it appears peculiar
> and mysterious to everyone, both to the novice and to the experienced
> physicist.
> <footer>p. 117</footer>

According to Feynman, the fact that there are things we do not know does not
mean that we are ignorant.  We can explain the limits of how things operate with
great precision, even though we cannot explain why.

About the conservation of energy:

> There is a fact, or if you wish, a law, governing all natural phenomena that
> are known to date.  There is no known exception to this law -- it is exact so
> far as we know.
> <footer>p. 69</footer>

As I was reading the book, I often found myself wondering how much progress
we've made since it had been written.  For instance, in last year's
[_Outgrowing God_](#Outgrowing_God), Richard Dawkins makes a case for complex
chemistry inevitably leads to self-replicating molecules like RNA and DNA, and
eventually living organisms.

Feynman does not reduce everything to physics.  He acknowledges that there are
areas of human knowledge outside of science.

> If something is said not to be a science, it does not mean that there
> something wrong with it; it just means that it is not a science.
> <footer>p. 47</footer>
