name: Childhoods_end
isbn13: 9780151172054
isbn: 0151172056
title: [Childhood's End](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0151172056)
author: Arthur C. Clarke
publisher: Harcourt, Brace & World
year: 1953
start: 2021-06-05
stop: 2021-06-19

I had read it a long, long time ago.  I recently re-watched the
[miniseries that aired on SyFy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Childhood%27s_End_(miniseries)).
I knew they had made some changes, but I couldn't recall the original.

The one thing that stuck with me from my first reading was this passage:

> Despite all their powers and their brilliance, the Overlords were trapped in
> some evolutionary cul-de-sac.  Here was a great and noble race, in almost
> every way superior to mankind; yet it had no future, and it was aware of it.
> <footer>p. 176</footer>

Clarke's worldview comes through many aspects of the novel.  His ideals of
egalitarianism and abolition of labor, academic pursuits and the relaxation of
sexual mores, all show.  But a feminist he is not.  Jean, the single female
protagonist, is the one to deal with cooking and managing domestic life, while
her husband works outside the home.

The world in the novel is a little too quick to accept the hegemony of the
Overlords.  The following quote talks to the need for self-determination that is
at the heart of being an independent adult.  It is unfortunate that Clarke
decided to put it in the mouth of one of the (apparently) irrational characters.

> I do not necessarily quarrel with Federation as an _ultimate_
> objective&mdash;though many of my supporters might not agree.  But it must
> come from within&mdash;not be superimposed from without.  We must work out our
> own destiny.
> <footer>p. 13</footer>

Clarke tried to extrapolate some trends that he was already observing in his
days.  Such as:

> Do you realize that _every day_ something like five hundred hours of radio and
> TV pour out over the various channels?
> <footer>p. 141</footer>

This statistic is put to shame by today's YouTube.

Clarke had some fun with vocabulary: "blunderbuss" (p. 55), "Cobalt bomb"
(p. 121), "bathos" (p.216).

Some elements in this novel will be picked up by other authors in cooperations
with Clarke.  The Overlords have a device akin to the one in _The Light of Other
Days_ (with Stephen Baxter) that can view the past and essentially destroys all
religions.  New Athens reminds me on the colony of deviant octospiders in the
[Rama novels](https://www.goodreads.com/series/49121-rama) (with Gentry Lee).
It's a safety a valve for eccentricity, similar to the problem of choice in the
Matrix movies.

When Jeff Greggson has a supernatural encounter during the tsunami, I was sure
he was making contact with the Overmind, even though the characters were hinting
strongly at the Overlords.  I was slightly disappointed when they turned out to
be right and I was wrong.

This passage discussing minds melding together was nice.

> Imagine that every man's mind is an island, surrounded by ocean.  Each seems
> isolated, yet in reality all are linked by the bedrock from which they spring.
> If the ocean were to vanish, that would be the end of the islands.  They would
> all be part of one continent, but their individuality would have gone.
> <footer>pp. 175-176</footer>

And this passage, near the end, was very poignant.  It's a rare moment when
Clarke moves away from hard science and touches on the human experience.

> It was too late now to say all that was due to her, and the regrets he felt
> were less for his deceits than for his past indifference.
> <footer>p. 190</footer>
