name: Harry_Potter_and_the_Half_Blood_Prince
isbn: 0439784549
title: [Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince](http://amzn.com/0439784549)
author: J. K. Rowling
publisher: Scholastic
year: 2005
start: 2005-07-16
stop: 2005-07-27

Less whiny than the previous installment.  Not quite as long
either.  That's two good starting points.  A lot of the action is
rather simplistic but makes for entertaining reading.  It'll make a
good movie when they get around to it.

I think Rowling fell into a trap of her own making.  She first
conceived the series where each book spans one school year at
Hogswart.  At first, this is nice because the novel can take its
pace from the various milestones in the school year: holidays,
exams, etc.  But it also forces her to sometimes stretch the action
in ways that seem unnatural.  For instance, Harry gets assigned an
important task and he does nothing about it for a full month until
the next available school calendar milestone.  He knew the task was
critical in a scope much larger than the school, and yet he does
nothing about it.  A lot of elements in the book lend themselves to
this kind of urgency and end up being delayed, apparently for the
sake of ending as the same time as the school year instead of well
before, say, Halloween.

In the American edition, each chapter is headed by a small
vignette that illustrates some of the action in that chapter.
After I had read Chapter 4 (of 30), I decided to look ahead at all
the chapter titles and vignettes, just out of curiosity.  Now, when
you look at a small image on top of some words, it is very hard not
to ignore said words, especially when they are highlighted one way
or another.  The same goes for the text on the facing page.  This
is how I came upon the major event of the novel, which occurs in
the last few paragraphs of Chapter 27 and continues in the opening
paragraphs of Chapter 28.  But I was not ready, yet!  I was still
on Chapter 4!  Damn those authors that put a chapter break right in
the middle of the key event in their novel!  Some would say I
shouldn't have been reading ahead in the first place, that I got
what I justly deserved.  "Curiosity killed the cat," and all that
nonsense.  Phooey.

Still, a very enjoyable installment in the Harry Potter series.
It reminded me of
[Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban](http://amzn.com/0439136350)
in the complexity of the intrigue and the level of background
exposition for the world of Harry Potter.  But don't go and read
ahead; trust me on this.
