name: Target_Iraq
isbn13: 9781893956391
isbn: 1893956393
title: [Target Iraq: What The News Media Didn't Tell You](http://amzn.com/1893956393)
author: Norman Solomon
author: Reese Erlich
publisher: Context Books
year: 2003
start: 2007-09-25
stop: 2007-10-01

Reese Erlich was at Google to promote his book
[The Iran Agenda](http://amzn.com/0977825353)
and though I was too late to get a copy of it, he had a few copies
of this book for sale, so I got one for $10.  It was published just
before the U.S. went in Iraq, so the tone throughout is of
impending war with still a fleeting hope for peace.  It all seems
so long ago.

A long laundry list of the lies perpetrated by the Bush
administration as it built its case against Saddam Hussein and how
the media were in on it.

The two most interesting pieces are analyses of a speech by
President Bush and the text of U.N. Security Council Resolution
1441.  Each sentence is commented by multiple political experts.
It was really interesting to see the use of language and how
innocuous sentences can be twisted to mean anything.

Again, many of the facts are anecdotal and even though tragic,
I sometimes wondered how widespread some of the opinions were.  For
instance, the authors blame the sanctions imposed on Iraq for the
hardships endured by the civilian population.  Not lifting these
sanctions is causing a humanitarian crisis within the country.
How much of it is really the responsibility of the parties
enforcing the sanctions and how much is the responsibility of the
Iraqi government?
