name: Clean_Code
isbn13: 9780132350884
isbn: 0132350882
title: [Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship](http://amzn.com/0132350882)
author: Robert C. Martin
publisher: Prentice Hall
year: 2009
start: 2008-08-18
stop: 2008-09-04

I like Uncle Bob.  He's a good communicator and he is always
entertaining.  This book repeats a lot of good advice that you can
find elsewhere and puts it conveniently under one set of
covers.

By pure coincidence, someone suggested I look at
[Seven Pillars of Pretty Code](http://www.perforce.com/perforce/papers/prettycode.html)
by Christopher Seiwald, who wrote the
[Perforce](http://perforce.com/) Source Control System.
This was at the same time as I was reading chapters 2 and 3 on
naming and composing functions.  Seiwald favors long functions
broken up into blocks, each prefaced with comments.  Uncle Bob
talks about lots of short methods with meaningful names,
alleviating the need for comments.  So while I'm reading about
writing code in the 21st Century, someone is actually pointing me
to this guide to writing code in the 70's.

Uncle Bob missed the boat with this book in at least two
regards: he only briefly mentions Dependency Injection and he
fails to capitalize on the testing terminology introduced by
Gerard Meszaros in
[xUnit Test Patterns](#xUnit_Test_Patterns).

Aside from that, it is a great read so far and I highly
recommend it to anyone who want to write better code, code that is
easier to maintain, code that is more testable.

In one of the case studies, he starts by showing a piece of his
code, drawing attention to how nice it is.  Well, it wasn't
_that_ nice, so I was expecting him to turn around and say
something to the tune of: "You thought it was nice, but it is
really quite dirty."  But he didn't.  Instead, he showed the
original code, before he had cleaned it up.  No doubt, the
original code was a disaster and his cleaned up version is far
superior, but I think if could have been made even better.  Going
through all the transformations along with the author was a really
nice way of looking at all the tradeoffs as he was making them.
The other, lengthier case study is even better.

I highly recommend this book to anyone who cares about the
quality and maintainability of the code they write.
