name: WebWork_in_Action
isbn: 1932394532
title: [WebWork in Action](http://amzn.com/1932394532)
author: Patrick Lightbody
author: Jason Carreira
publisher: Manning
year: 2006
start: 2006-01-12
stop: 2006-02-13

We use WebWork at work and I wanted to learn more.  The
documentation that ships with WebWork can be spotty, and since it
consists largely of an alphabetical dump of their wiki, it is
fairly hard to follow beyond the initial tutorial.

Anyone who wants to use WebWork should read this book.  It is
the best resource on WebWork out there, even though it has quite a
few flaws.

It does a pretty good job of covering all aspects of WebWork and
all the features it brings to the table.  Many of the examples show
code one way and then evolve it before your very eyes into a better
solution, often more than once.  The transitions could use better
highlighting, though.  I learned a lot about the capabilities of
WebWork and it helped change the way I thought about one
application I want to migrate from plain JSPs to WebWork.

One big problem is that the framework is still evolving quite a
bit.  The authors wrote the book mostly for version 2.1 but version
2.2 came out about the same time as the book and contains quite a
few deviations.  For instance, one of the first things you do is
map `*.action` URLs to the `ServletDispatcher` servlet, which is deprecated in 2.2.
The deprecation notice does say to use
`FilterDispatcher` instead, but its documentation says
to map it to `*` now.  After you've read the entire
book, you're in a better position to understand what is going on,
but it is confusing when you are only trying to get the early
examples to work.

The book has numerous typos throughout and the highly didactic
tone can sometimes feel condescending.
