name: The_Human_Organization_of_Time
isbn: 0804741077
isbn13: 9780804741071
title: [[http://amzn.com/0804741077][The Human Organization of Time: Temporal Realities and Experience]]
author: Allen C. Bluedorn
publisher: Stanford Business Press
year: 2002
acquired: 2013-01-16
start: 2017-02-24
stop: 2017-09-15

Back when I was reading _[[#Good%5FBoss%5FBad%5FBoss][Good Boss, Bad Boss]]_, I
came upon a discussion of stand-up meetings that referenced "The Effects of
Stand-Up and Sit-Down Meeting Formats on Meeting Outcomes" by Bluedorn et al.
Digging a little further led me to this book.

The description promises a discussion on the nature of Time, how we perceive it,
and how human constructs are built around it.  Sounds fascinating.  And boy,
does it deliver!

First, a note on form.  The book reads very much like a scientific paper.  There
are a lot of interesting factoids, but every major assertion is backed either by
the author's own research or by that of others.  Eco and Kundera can synthesize
all the knowledge they've accumulated throughout their career, but their books
read more like their own thoughts and opinions than something laboriously
research.  Fried and DHH just draw endlessly from their one anecdote.  Here,
Bluedorn is doing _Science_.  The rigor and attention to details are beautiful
to see (if sometimes tedious) and lend much more weight to the material.

Now, on to substance.

<blockquote>

Time is the fundamental dimension of our existence.

<footer>Prigogine, page 20</footer>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>

In the form of time is to be found the form of living.

<footer>Elliott Jacques, epigraph</footer>
</blockquote>

Time is essential to how we conduct our lives, from undertaking the day's
activities (what is a _day_, anyway?), to how we conceive our place in the
cosmos, and everything in between.  Our lives are governed by a multitude of
interacting rhythms, like the day-night cycle or the work day or the calendar.
How these rhythms interact and how we reacts to them varies tremendously between
cultures and between individuals.

<blockquote>

In the seventeenth century both Cervantes and Newton wrote about time.  Yet they
reached fundamentally different conclusions about this abstruse phenomenon.

<footer>page 20</footer>
</blockquote>

Cervantes wrote about a subjective perception of time that is specific to the
individual.  Newton wrote about an objective time that does not depend on the
observer, closer to what a clock is measuring.  The book also draws a
distinction between _epochal_ time, more subjective and tied to events, and
_fungible_ time that is the same no matter what.  An hour is an hour.  Funny
enough, before the advent of reliable mechanical clocks, day and night were each
divided into twelve "hours".  Since the length of days and nights varies
throughout the year depending on latitude, hours would be longer or shorter
depending on the season.

Time is a nebulous concept and these are different aspects of it, akin to
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind%5Fmen%5Fand%5Fan%5Felephant][the blind men and the elephant]].
Here is a nice example: Bluedorn has a watch that tells time, which ties him to
fungible time, and ancient sundials, and the primordial day/night cycle.  But
his watch was an anniversary present, so it also ties him to more the personal
experiences of his wedding and its 25th anniversary.  The watch stands at
multiple positions on the continuum between fungible time and epochal time,
depending on the perspective.

Another aspect the book delves into is _polychronicity_, the preference for
engaging in activities in parallel or one after the other.  There is a continuum
that goes from doing one thing at a time (monochronicity) to two, three, or more
things in parallel.  It can apply at the micro level, such as ordinary
multitasking, and it can apply at the macro level, such as "detailed planning
followed by execution" (monochronic) versus "make corrections as you go"
(polychronic).  Despite a number of studies, there is no clear evidence that one
end of the spectrum is arbitrarily better than the other.  It depends a lot on
the context and the type of work being done.  It is also not clear if a person
or organization or society's place on that spectrum is stable, or if they go in
and out of it.

Punctuality became important with the Industrial Revolution, where factories
needed to coordinate many tasks.  It was helped by ever more precise time
pieces.  But even then, what constitute _on time_ varies greatly by society and
activity.  This quote shows that even ancient Romans complained about the
tyranny of the clock, even though in his case it was a simple sundial:

<blockquote>

May the Gods confound that man who first disclosed the hours, and who first, in
fact, erected a sun-dial here; who, for wretched me, minced the day up into
pieces.

<footer>Plautus, page 89</footer>
</blockquote>

Fun fact: Bluedorn shows a punctuality award that his grand-mother received when
she was a little girl.  As I was clearing out my parents' basement, I found some
of the same that I received back in grade school.  That's an interesting
connection.

Bluedorn explores the concepts of _temporal focus_, whether someone is focused
more on the past or the future, and _temporal depth_, how far into the past or
future someone tends to look.  Where do you draw the line between near-, mid-,
and long-term, between recent and distant past?  It is interesting to note that
people who look far into the past also look far into the future, and conversely,
people who do not look far into the past tend to think more short-term about the
future.  The age of a person or culture has a strong influence on how far they
look into the past, and therefore into the future.  The book briefly mentions
[[http://longnow.org][The Long Now Foundation]], and their 10,000 Year Clock
project, as an example of long term thinking into the future.  He also mentions
how, in linguistics, the use of the future perfect tense can make the future
more concrete by casting that future into the past.

While he was gathering data, Bluedorn noticed that people's answers varied
depending on whether he ask them to think about the past first, or about the
future first.  How far they looked into the past was pretty consistent, but they
tended to have a longer future horizon if they had been asked to think about the
past beforehand.  This is a nice example of psychological priming and a reminder
that the order of questions in a survey can affect the results.

One of the strongest points of the book, for me, was the relationships between
past, present, and future.  At a fundamental level, _meaning_ comes from the
connections between things.  It is our connection to the past that gives the
present any meaning.  This, in turn, sets up our hopes for the future.  More
connections to a deeper past can generate a strong sense of meaning.  And using
the past as a predictor for the future, it can make use very hopeful.
Conversely, a lack of connection to the deep future can lead to despair.  Modern
shallow temporal depth gives us fewer opportunities for connections, but we can
manufacture stand-ins, such as the tomb of the unknown soldier and other
commemorative monuments.

_Carpe diem_: how do people make the best of the time they have?  Planning
implies connection to the past and project into the future.  It might have
helped evolution for intra-group cooperation and inter-group competition.  The
flip side of planning is that procrastination can lead to a feeling of missed
opportunities and falling behind.  The book briefly touches on the importance of
work-life balance and one's perceived control of time.  To control your time is
to control your life.  Taylor confused the quantity of work that was possible
from the quantity of work that was desirable.  Young children have pure play 
(for its own sake), that gradually fades away to be replaced by games and
organized activities (whose motivation lies outside of them: winning, surviving,
etc.).

I'm going to close with the author's strange fascination with Daylight Saving
Time.  He's looked at and conducted some research into people's behavior when
we go in and out of DST and identified some unwanted disruptions.  He therefore
advocates for getting rid of DST.  But he totally ignores the reasons we have
DST in the first place.  I don't know if the economic incentives are still
relevant, but it seems worth it to have a balanced look at this topic.  Perhaps
the benefits outweigh the inconveniences.

The book is really dense with information and these notes leave out a lot more.

On 2018-05-29, [[https://zachholman.com/][Zach Holman]] wrote
[[https://zachholman.com/talk/utc-is-enough-for-everyone-right][a lengthy article about time]]
that nicely complements this book.
