name: Production_Ready_GraphQL
title: [Production Ready GraphQL](https://book.productionreadygraphql.com/)
author: Marc-Andr&eacute; Giroux
publisher: self-published
year: 2020
acquired: 2020-03-23
start: 2020-03-24
stop: 2020-05-16

Self-published, so the page setting is a little strange (I suspect LaTeX) and
the text could have used some editing.  Switching between first person (_we_)
and second person (_you_) within the same paragraph forces mental switching on
the part of the reader that is not necessary.  Giroux should decide if he is
with the reader (first person, _we_) or if he's only talking at them (second
person, _you_), and stick with it.  A good editor would have caught this and
they would have made the prose tighter.  But the author did build GraphQL APIs
at Spotify and GitHub, so he knows the material otherwise.

Giroux advocates for building APIs that are as specific as possible, instead of
generic ones.  Especially when it comes to mutations.  The more specific the
better.

There is a complex description of cursor-based pagination as opposed to the
more common pagination using an offset.  The former are more resilient to cases
where data gets added or removed in the middle of lists while the end-users are
paging through them.

There is an interesting bit about how to deal with errors.  The author
distinguishes between _client_ errors, essentially protocol errors, and _user_
errors, errors in the business logic.  E.g., email already in use, password too
weak.

The author acknowledges that GraphQL still needs to grow in a few areas.
Companies use it mostly for internal, private APIs.  Best practices around error
messages and observability (tracing, rate limiting, etc.) are still emerging.
When you build a GraphQL client against a published API, you still need to learn
the specific ways that API does everything besides queries and mutations.

Giroux provides a code example for schema stitching, which is deprecated, but
not for a federated schema, which is an emerging technology.  It would have been
nice to look at both options side-by-side and show how federation handles some
of the limitations of stitching.  The Apollo federation equivalent would have
been even shorter than the schema stitching code example.

The chapter on documentation is great.  The advice is: Don't just provide a
dictionary of types and fields.  Also provide examples that show how these
things can work together to solve problems.  Maybe even provide high-level
examples that solve business problems using multiple parts of your API.

When the author presents his preferred workflow, it is front-loaded with a lot
of analysis.  You craft the schema carefully before you  implement it, and
gather a lot of feedback from beta clients before final publication.  This is
very much a waterfall process and it does not work well in practice.  You need
to put things in the hands of users to see how they will use them.  There is
only so much you can really anticipate, or that the users can tell you ahead of
time.  We need a technology that can operate in tight feedback cycles and evolve
with guidance from real world usage.

At the end of the chapter on versioning, the advice is again
big-design-up-front.  Giroux is quick to point out the risks of breaking
existing clients, but there are also risks to having an API that stagnates and
customer features that are not being built in a timely manner.  It's a tough act
to balance and Giroux's presentation felt one-sided.
