name: Growing_Object_Oriented_Software
isbn: 0321503627
title: [Growing Object-Oriented Software, Guided by Tests](http://amzn.com/0321503627)
author: Steve Freeman
author: Nat Pryce
publisher: Addison-Wesley
year: 2010
acquired: 2010-06-03
start: 2010-12-20
stop: 2011-02-09

Came recommended by Kent Beck.  The authors wrote jMock.  This book explains
how they approach writing tests.

Well worth the read, whether you're new to TDD or if you're a seasoned
practitioner.  Parts I and II lay out how TDD works and the authors' philosophy
with regard to writing software.  Many other books describe TDD and the authors
are candid when it comes to their personal practices.  YMMV.  Part III is a very
comprehensive case study where they use the practices _in anger_, that is,
trying to achieve some goal and not just as a toy exercise.  Part IV revisits
some of the concepts illustrated in the case study.  Part V pays special
attention to some advanced concerns when writing tests, such as testing
persistence or multithreaded code.

Ever since I began using [JUnit](http://junit.org/), I've been adamant about
initializing the fixture in the `setUp()` method and **not** in the constructor.
Early JUnit would create all test instances before it ran the first test, so you
didn't want to reserve any resources in the constructor.  A class with 20 tests
would reserve and hold 20 resources for the duration of the test run.  Instead,
you reserve the resource in `setUp()` and free it in `tearDown()`.  This way,
instead of holding up 20 resources, at most one is held at any given time.  And
the best way to remember to reserve expensive resources in `setUp()` only is to
do **all** fixture initialization there rather than split it up between
constructor and `setUp()`.

So you can imagine my surprise when I see the authors initialize their fixtures
in their test class constructors.  What are they thinking?!?!  I had to go back
and write some sample tests using the latest JUnit and print traces in
constructors, `setUp()`, tests, and `tearDown()` to validate my assumptions.  Lo
and behold, at some point in time, JUnit got it's act together and now creates
test instances as it runs tests, not all of them at the beginning of the test
run.  For a moment, I was afraid that [Grails](http://grails.org/) might leave
me stuck in the dark ages of `setUp()`-only initialization, but I'm safe there
too.  Now, I can update my habits.

The sample problem had lots of complexity: GUI, asynchronous communication,
Jabber-based RPC, etc.  Some of the code transformations are sometimes hard to
follow, especially the further you get into the case study and they pick up the
pace.  Some side-by-side comparisons would have been welcome, but maybe hard to
do in the limited space of the book.

The authors used a neat trick to track their development progress through the
sample problem.  They kept a hand-written list of tasks on a sheet of paper,
crossed out items as they completed them, and added tasks as they happened upon
them.  Here's a snapshot from the somewhere halfway through:

<blockquote class="todo-list">
<span class="list-title">Todo</span><br />
<span class="todo done">single item - join, lose without bidding</span><br />
<span class="todo done">single item - join, bid & lose</span><br />
<span class="todo done">single item - join, bid & win</span><br />
<span class="todo done">single item - show price details</span><br />
<span class="todo">multiple items</span><br />
<span class="todo">add new item through the GUI</span><br />
<span class="todo">stop bidding at stop price</span><br />
<span class="todo new">translator - invalid message from Auction</span><br />
<span class="todo new">translator - incorrect message version</span><br />
<span class="todo new">handle XMPException on send</span><br />
</blockquote>

I used a similar technique a long time ago to implement a feature with great
success.  I'm going to re-introduce it to my toolset going forward.

I really liked the chapter on test data builders.  I already grew more
comfortable using test helper methods to clarify the text of a given test after
reading Gerard Meszaros' [xUnit Test Patterns](#xUnit_Test_Patterns).  The
builders in this book take it to another level.  The authors use builders and
Hamcrest matchers to create DSLs that really make tests easy to read and makes
their purpose crystal clear.  Groovy and Grails already have support for writing
builders and I'll have to spend some time adapting the examples in the book to
the Groovy way.
