name: The_Infinity_of_Lists
isbn: 0847832961
isbn13: 9780847832963
title: [The Infinity of Lists](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0847832961)
title: <i>La Vertigine della Lista</i>
author: Umberto Eco
publisher: Rizzoli
year: 2009
acquired: 2019-05-25
start: 2020-11-09
stop: 2020-12-27

Umberto Eco goes crazy for literary lists.  He talks about lists as a literary
device over the past 3,000 years of Western culture.

Each chapter starts with a short essay on a given aspect of lists, specifically
lists as literary devices.  Most often, it is followed by excerpts from the
body of Western literature, interspersed throughout with reproductions of
artworks from the body of Western culture.  Eco's erudition is on full display
as he curates artworks from Antiquity, through the Middle Ages, to the
20<sup>th</sup> Century.

The essays tend to be rather dense, but still interesting.  They are too brief
to really dig into any given topic or to really educate the reader.  The excepts
can contain a lot of variation, and the context and stylistic switching is hard
on the reader, too.

One of the themes covered is how authors can use a finite list to hint at an
infinity subject, coupled with the _topos of ineffability_, where the author
acknowledges their limitation at showing the infinite.  They can show a sample
and rely on the reader's imagination to do the rest.  This works in paintings,
too, when the viewer can continue a landscape past the limits of the frame, but
it is much more difficult with sculptures.

There is also a recurring theme of the _pragmatic list_, based on the signified,
what matters is the subject, vs. the _poetic list_, based on the signifier, what
matters are the words.

Some other standouts:

- _things_ collecting on the Moon by Ariosto (1532): fame, time, hour,
  "countless vows", "prayers unnumbered", "empty desires", sighs, wits.
- musical instruments by Mann (1947)
- the Litany of Loreto, where names are clearly ordered by reverence, yet they
  go through all manners of men before they get to any women (except for Many)
- ordered lists where the order itself can confer meaning, like the first
  oration against Catiline (p. 134)
- religious treasures that bring back memories of the abbot in _The Name of the
  Rose_ and his love of gems
- classifying things either by describing their essence (impractical) or by
  listing their characteristics; the latter is more practical, but potentially
  infinite
- the nose tirade in _Cyrano of Bergerac_, a favorite of Eco, according to
  [a French interview](https://youtu.be/XWgqbUnXsqA?t=523)
- taxonomies that can be like a tree with a root or like a rhizome, where
  everything is connected to everything else, like Los Angeles.
- long lists for the sake of making them long (here, Rabelais was rough)
- Hugo's description of the Convention (1874) was very lifelike, coupled with
  David's drawing of _Le Serment du Jeu de paume_ on page 272
- Zola has two characters traverse a wide landscape overgrown with every
  conceivable flowers (1875, pp. 296-299), capped with a painting by Delacroix
- Döblin's description of a Berlin slaughterhouse
- "enumeraciones desarticulatas" (p. 327)

I really liked the citations of _Carmina Burana_ and Milton and Villon and
Éluard.  And, of course, the citations of works of Eco himself.

> Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the
> sun, and terrible as an army with banners?
> <footer>Song of Songs, p.223</footer>

Most texts are in English, but often translated from other languages.  There
were bits in French, which was nice.  I often wondered how far the translations
were from the originals.

> He robbed him of a great deal of his natural force, and so do all those who
> try to turn books written in verse into another language
> <footer>Cervantes, 1615, p. 387</footer>

There is a stunning picture on pages 94-95: _Imaginary View of the Main
Monuments of Italy_ by Petrus Henricus Theodorus Tetar van Elven.  It dates back
to 1858 and shows a number of Italian buildings in a wooded countryside, across
a bay.  I was surprised that I couldn't find anything about it on the Internet.

> a third emerged, which might be called San Francisco and which spans the
> Golden Gate and the bay with long, light bridges and sends open trams climbing
> its steep streets, and which might blossom as capital of the Pacific a
> millennium hence [...] in an empire more vast than the Great Khan's.
> <footer>Calvino, 1972, p. 97</footer>

Funny enough, as I was reading Huysman's allegory of liquors and music on page
196, I was listening to _Swan Lake_ and hearing actual clarinets and oboes.

And, in 2009, Eco was ahead of fake news and deep fakes and alternate facts.

> Finally, we come to the Mother of all Lists, infinite by definition because it
> is in constant evolution, the World Wide Web, which is both web and labyrinth,
> not an ordered tree, and which of all vertigos promises us the most mystical,
> almost totally virtual one, and really offers us a catalogue of information
> that makes us feel wealthy and omnipotent, the only snag being that we don't
> know which of its elements refers to data from the real world and which does
> not, no longer with any distinction between truth and error.
> <footer>p. 360</footer>

This next quote is a real _tour de force_ of constructing words with prefixes.

> Antipericatametanaparbeugedamphicribrationes Toordicantium.
> <footer>Rabelais, 1564, p. 381</footer>

A quote by Italo Calvino accurately captures all my trips to the bookstore.

> you have forced your way through the shop past the thick barricade of Books
> You Haven't Read, [...]
> <footer>Calvino, 1979, p. 392</footer>

This last quote, from
[a poem by Apollinaire](https://allpoetry.com/La-Jolie-Rousse#tr_8508473),
applies well to software engineering.  We're often asked to estimate how long a
task will take, when it has never been attempted before.  Our best guess will
likely be way off, since there is a lot about the work that we won't know until
we're deep into the execution of it.

> Pity for us who always battle on the frontier / Of the boundless and the
> future.
> <footer>Apollinaire, 1918, p. 398</footer>
