name: StrengthsFinder_2_0
isbn: 159562015X
title: [StrengthsFinder 2.0](http://amzn.com/159562015X)
author: Tom Rath
publisher: Gallup Press
year: 2007
start: 2009-03-11
stop: 2009-03-12

Starts with a cool idea: instead of spending time trying to get better at
things you have no talent for, why not work at being great at things you have a
natural affinity for?  Each of us has things they tend to be good at (talents),
and things they tend to not be good at (let's call them handicaps).  Why should
we spend time and energy overcoming our handicaps, at the expense of our
talents?  At most, we'll be average at them for a lot of effort.  Instead, we
should spend our efforts in line with our talents and become really great at
them.

The book outlines 34 _themes_, or areas of strength that Gallup has identified
after looking at _millions_ of profiles.  It also gives you access to an online
assessment that will magically tell you your top five strengths.  Each theme
has a nice description that makes you warm and fuzzy inside.  Each also has
activities to help you develop it.  It's kinda like astrology, really: the
descriptions are so fuzzy and use such powerful words that no matter which one
you happen to read, you'll find that it matches you at some level and will
sound like something you'd want to get better at.  Luckily, there's the online
assessment to make sure you only bother with five of them so you don't get too
confused.

Of course, you cannot take the assessment without first purchasing the book.
The entire intro reads like a pressure sales pitch for a psychic hotline.  I'm
very suspicious of opaque claims supported by pseudo-science with made-up names
that come complete with a dead founder with a ludicrous made-up title that must
be repeated in full every single time:
_Father of Strengths Psychology, Dr. Donald O. Clifton_.

I like the premise of pursuing your own strengths, but the execution feels more
like a religious cult than an exercise in reason.  I went along, just for the
sake of entertainment.  My top five strengths are: Input, Context,
Individualization, Intellection, and Adaptability.  A few of the others sounded
good to me, like Futuristic, for example.  But the magical assessment program
did not pick it when it used a whole slew of weird questions to somehow plumb
my subconscious and decide on what my top five strengths were.

The book is essentially a sales pitch for the website.  It tells you precious
little about anything.  It's only real value is in the code to take the online
assessment.  The book is definitely **not** worth $20, and I would **not** pay $20
for a self-help test.  To me, it's barely a step above the get-rich-quick scam
where you make a video on how to get rich in which you tell people to make a
video on how to get rich.
