name: Collapse_Feminism
isbn: 1915672015
isbn13: 9781915672018
title: [Collapse Feminism](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1915672015)
author: Alice Cappelle
publisher: Repeater Books
year: 2023
acquired: 2023-11-14
start: 2024-03-02
stop: 2024-03-09

I like Cappelle's [video essays](https://www.youtube.com/@AliceCappelle).  She
deals mostly with social issues and perspectives in France and on the Internet.
Now that she's written a book, I'm curious to read it.

**Disclaimer**: I'm a progressive and this book is unabashedly
anti-conservative.  So, of course, I liked it.  I'm trying to look past my
personal bias and see if the book can stand on its own merits.

Cappelle does a survey of feminism as of 2023, and some of the adjacent
concepts like masculinities and capitalism.  She explores the most popular
themes on the Internet as of 2023, such as _girlboss_, "that girl", `#tradlife`,
and `#fitgirl`.  She describes how these trends start as women empowerment, but
rarely question the patriarchy itself.

> When a woman uses her sex appeal to elevate herself, she is generally
> perceived as morally bad.
> <footer>p. 152</footer>

Conservatives lean on the patriarchy to reinstate older models of behavior for
women.  They are reactionary in regard to the sexual revolution and use
dissatisfaction, especially among young men, to promote a return to previous
notions of the nuclear family and gender roles.  The manosphere and incels
capitalize on men's insecurities to exploit them.  All treat women as objects to
be desired.

> As Western societies became more inclusive, marginalised communities
> [&hellip;] have been allowed, encouraged or forced to comply with the nuclear
> family model.
> <footer>p. 135</footer>

Cappelle describes efforts by the Black Panther Party to empower their
communities away from patriarchal capitalism.  She also touches on the concept
of ag&aacute;pe&#772; as a similar way to tap into communal love.

> [&hellip;] reject the idea that the formation of one's identity [&hellip;] can
> only be mediated through a fixed gender expression.  In other words, it is
> reductive to attach a set of moral values (toxic or positive) to masculinity.
> Why do we tell boys to become good _men_ and not just a good _people_?
> <footer>p. 129</footer>

Cappelle gives Timoth&eacute;e Chalamet as a positive example of a man who is 
simply a good person.

As a sidenote, see this YouTube interview about
[how young men are failing in modern society](https://youtu.be/54H8ppxnp8I?si=2U_pHohCs9N_vQck).

The book ends with a few wishful sentences about what we should build in the
future.  It would have been interesting to develop these forward-looking ideas
more.  The book as a whole is a good survey of 2020's attitudes on feminism,
particularly on the Internet.  But it doesn't have much concrete advice on how
to go from here.  What should be our goal?  And, what should be our next steps?
