name: Two_Scoops_of_Django_1.11
isbn: 0692915729
isbn13: 9780692915721
title: [Two Scoops of Django 1.11](http://a.co/eYbE79z)
author: Daniel Roy Greenfeld
author: Audrey Roy Greenfeld
publisher: Two Scoops Press
year: 2013
year: 2017
acquired: 2018-06-11
start: 2018-06-14
stop: 2018-07-28

I was looking for a good book to learn
[Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) and this one was at the top of the
lists.  So, let's start with a quote.

> This book is not a tutorial.  If you are new to Django, this book will be
> helpful but large parts will be challenging for you.
> <footer>page xxxi</footer>

I've been doing web apps for many years, and I've dabbled in Python a while
back.  Surely I'll be smart enough to fill in the gaps, provided the examples
have enough context.

The early chapters about setting up a project and organizing settings went fine.
The authors zeroed in on one approach, gave a trivial example, and discussed the
forces at play.  It's opinionated, but I can relate.  But by the time we get to
models and database queries and views, the trivial examples are gone and there
is nothing to establish a context for the conversation.  There are deep links to
the official documentation, but I basically have to put the book down to go read
a ton of materials on the web before I can continue on.

So I stopped reading after ~20%.  I'll come back to it when I know Django
better.

Django is now at version 2.0.6 but the book is about version 1.11.  A quick
search for the differences listed some rather advanced concepts, so I think it
should still hold up for casual users.
