name: Truth_of_the_Divine
isbn: 1250278753
isbn: 1250274540
isbn13: 9781250278753
isbn13: 9781250274540
title: [Truth of the Divine](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1250274540)
author: Lindsay Ellis
publisher: St. Martin's Press
year: 2021
acquired: 2021-08-24
start: 2021-09-09
stop: 2021-10-02

The sequel to [_Axiom's End_](#Axioms_End).  I received an advanced copy thanks
to a [Goodreads](https://goodreads.com/) giveaway.  Thank you, Goodreads and
St. Martin's Press!

### As a Story

The relationship between Cora and Ampersand takes a backseat.  Both show signs
of PTSD and they are withdrawn for much of the story.  It is not clear if they
are doing this independently of each other, or if it is a side effect of their
special bond.  The new pairing of Kaveh and Enola operates differently from the
pairing of Cora and Ampersand.  There are very interesting and varied dynamics
between all four main characters.  Whereas Cora was in survival mode for most of
_Axiom's End_, Kaveh wants to report on the aliens.  Whereas Ampersand was on a
mission, Enola is more free to just be themselves.

Cora's and Ampersand's psyche are tightly intertwined, to the point where we're
never sure if it's her or Ampersand coming through.

> Is this my thought it yours? Same as it always is--it's ours.
> <footer>pp. 280-314</footer>

> It wouldn't be the worst thing in the world.
> <footer>pp. 262-314</footer>

One recurring theme is whether the aliens are _persons_, with implications like
names, gender identities, and rights and obligations.  If people introduce a
class system to separate humans from aliens, it's a slippery slope to separating
humans in classes, too, and an opportunity for fascists to take control.  But if
people give personhood to the aliens, how can they prevent these aliens, with
their advanced knowledge and technology, from taking over?

> ... if there are two cultures, the dominant one will always try to reshape the
> less powerful one, and if they can't do that, they destroy them.
> <footer>p. 400</footer>

There is a great bit on the importance, or lack thereof, of gender and pronouns
on p. 172.

Ellis puts the following words in the mouth of a 2008 journalist:

> democratic norms are easily exploited when populists capitalize on mass fear
> for political gain
> <footer>p. 477</footer>

They were even more relevant in 2021, when I read them, in a post-Trump era
where the Big Lie is still going strong, and the January 6th insurrection is
being spun by spin doctors. Ellis is letting her feelings show about the
political climate in the U.S.

### As a Novel

One of the themes of _Axiom's End_ was the difficulties of communicating and how
a message can be interpreted differently from what was intended.  This novel
takes things a step further and asks how much can we truly know what is in
another person's head?  As the story unfolds, we begin to wonder if the
interlocutors have ulterior motives and whether they are tailoring their
statements to manipulate accordingly.

I liked the part where we see the relationship from Kaveh's perspective first,
and we make assumptions about what is going on in Cora's head.  Then, it flips
around, and we see it from her point of view in the next chapter.  And realize
it wasn't what we thought it was.

Ellis worked out a nice piece of foreshadowing:

> There was a fourth shot, but Kaveh did not hear it.
> <footer>p. 441</footer>

Ellis named her books the "Noumena Series".  I looked up _noumena_ and all I
could find was
[an article on Kantian philosophy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noumenon).  A
_noumenon_ refers to the true nature of something, beyond what we can understand
of it externally.  _Phenomenon_ is what we can perceive.  _Noumenon_ is the
internal reality that remains beyond understanding.  Cora tries to understand
Ampersand through the limited lens of what he's telling her, but that is not the
same as what Ampersand himself experiences of his consciousness.  And
conversely, when Ampersand tries to understand humans in general, and Cora in
particular, he is limited by what he can perceive and by his own assumptions.

In the book, Ellis describes _noumenal dimensions_ to denote the extra
dimensions beyond our three known dimensions.  Our senses cannot to perceive
these additional dimensions, but are used in Physics to explain the Universe.  I
could not find any references to this use of _noumenal_.

### The _Divine_ of the Title

The title is only tangentially relevant to the events in the novel.

In _Axiom's End_, the meaning of the title was revealed late in the novel.  The
_axiom_ was that the Superorganism and humans each thought they were the only
sentient species on the Universe.  The novel doesn't really dwell on the
implications of this axiom or the consequences of it being challenged.

Here again, the concept of _divine_, as conceived in the novel, bears very
little on the events that unfold, though it is present as an undercurrent if you
look closely.  It is explained at one point as the sum of all that is knowable
in the universe and also all that is unknowable.  This is in contrast to our
limited capacity to understand only a tiny fraction of it.  Enola uses an
interesting metaphor for it.  Here, _divine_ denotes things that are beyond our
comprehension, not anything supernatural.

It wouldn't be a Lindsay Ellis novel without some passing references to
Transformers (p. 112), Eldritch horror (p. 398), and Lovecraftian madness
(p. 237).  This time around, she even throws in Galaxy Quest (p. 305).
