name: L_homme_au_deficient_manteau
isbn13: 9782764803400
isbn: 2764803400
title: [L'homme au d&eacute;ficient manteau](http://www.amazon.ca/dp/2764803400)
author: Georges-H&eacute;bert Germain
publisher: Libre Expression
year: 2007
start: 2008-04-17
stop: 2008-05-04

This is a biography of Marc Favreau, the actor behind the
Qu&eacute;bec clown Sol.  I remember watching Sol in a kid's tv
show when I was young.  Sol has been a fixture of the Qu&eacute;bec
artistic scene since the 1960's.  Favreau died a couple years ago
and the author was a personal close friend.  Sounds promissing.

The book paints a great portrait of the cultural scene in
Qu&eacute;bec after World War II until the Quiet Revolution in the
late 1960s.  It shows the great influence from France as local
artists were trying to find their voice.  It shows that this
period was not the _Great Darkness_ that others claim it
was, but that there was a vibrant cultural scene and that the
questioning of institutions had already begun.

As to its main subject, Marc Favreau, the book turned out to be
quite the hagiography.  If we are to believe Mr. Germain, Marc
Favreau was quasi-perfect.  He always managed to get his way,
everything he touched turned to gold, he never had any major
disappointments in life.  Everybody loved him.  While it is hard to
dispute most of the facts in the book, I suspect that maybe the
author skipped some of the passages that would have cast a less
favorable light upon his idol.  Now, I really want to re-read Milan
Kundera's [Testaments Betrayed](#Les_testaments_trahis),
which deals exactly with this situation, where an artist's legacy
is left completely in the hands of his or her most fervent fans,
for better or for worse.

Marc Favreau was pretty much self-thought, which usually gives
me pause.  But he seemed to do very well for himself.  Even though
he taught himself everything he knew, he kept trying to learn new
things throughout his life.  To me, that's the sign of an open mind
and I know a lot of people with diplomas that don't have it.

The pages that described his death from cancer were very
touching.  Very intimate, very human.

My memories of Sol go back to when I was a very young lad.  But
I had not realized that even back then, the children tv shows where
he played were already in rerun (_Sol et Gobelet_ was
produced from 1968 until 1971).  It was really nice to see how the
character was born and evolved throughout the years.  Taking
inspiration in the _Commedia dell'arte_, Favreau created a
character starting with an auguste clown who suffered at the hands
of the whitefaced clowns.  He evolved him through the years into the
mouthpiece of an inner whiteface that is hiding inside Sol and is
trying to guide society using the persona of Sol, an apparently
harmless vagrant.

A while back, I got a DVD boxed set of Sol.  When I started
watching them, I was a little disappointed that he didn't seem to
be as funny as I remembered.  The gags were too easy, too
disconnected.  The whole felt a little amateurish.  Now that I have
a better understanding of the man behind Sol and the message he
was trying to pass through his character, I want to look at Sol's
shows once more to see if maybe it was just that I didn't get
it.
