name: Beren_and_Luthien
isbn: 1328791823
isbn13: 9781328791825
title: [Beren and L&uacute;thien](http://a.co/9En3O9B)
author: J.R.R. Tolkien
author: Christopher Tolkien
publisher: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
year: 2017
acquired: 2017-12-25
start: 2018-08-02
stop: 2018-09-12

Following [_The Children of H&uacute;rin_](#The_Children_of_Hurin),
Christopher Tolkien pulls out all the Beren and L&uacute;thien materials and
puts them under one set of covers.

Having read [_The Story of Kullervo_](#The_Story_of_Kullervo) gave me a
better appreciation for the comparative study of the many version of a text and
see its evolution.  I used to be annoyed by earlier versions of beloved texts,
with their unfamiliar names, contradictory details, and ragged beginnings and
ends.  But here, I really liked all these idiosyncrasies.

Once again, Christopher Tolkien limited the editorial work he had done
previously in [_The Silmarillion_](http://amzn.com/0618391118) and tried to
present as cohesive a text as possible out of all the different versions found
in _The History of Middle-Earth_.  And once again, mission accomplished.  The
introduction does its best to set the stage and manage expectations of readers
unfamiliar with J.R.R. Tolkien's tales of the Elder Days.

It was nice to see all the additional details for some of the scenes.  Like the
material regarding Tevildo, Prince of Cats, for instance, and the strange names
of his thanes: Oikeroi, Umuiyan, Miaul&euml;; names unlike anything else in the
works of J.R.R. Tolkien.

I liked the writing style too; it suggests old heroic tales and myths. I tripped
quite a few times in the older texts where the archaic word _an_ is used to mean
_if_.  The other archaisms didn't give me much trouble and contributed to the
atmosphere of myth.  For example:

> So thou has returned too - bringing a Silmaril , beyond doubt, in recompense
> for all the ill thou hast wrought my land; or **an** thou hast not, I know not
> wherefore thou art here.
> <footer>page 82</footer>

Independently, I stumbled on this bit about _epic poetry_ while looking up
something about [Beowulf on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beowulf):

> Beowulf is considered an epic poem in that the main character is a hero who
> travels great distances to prove his strength at impossible odds against
> supernatural demons and beasts.
