name: The_Omnivore_s_Dilemma
isbn: 1594200823
title: [The Omnivore's Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals](http://amzn.com/1594200823)
author: Michael Pollan
publisher: Penguin Press
year: 2006
start: 2007-04-05
stop: 2007-05-12

A colleague suggested this book to me, saying it was in the somewhat along the
same line as [_Fast Food Nation_](http://amzn.com/0060838582).

Pollan identifies four _food chains_ that go from where the food is produced to
our plates.

<dl>
    <dt><b>industrial</b></dt>
    <dd>
        Based on corn and highly processed.  Everything on the plate comes from
        corn: corn-fed steer, corn-fed chicken, high-fructose corn syrup.
        Relies a lot on heavy mechanization, which can dehumanize the whole
        thing.
    </dd>
    <dt><b>big organic</b></dt>
    <dd>
        An effort to return to the roots but still supply a large scale market.
        The rejection of hormones, artificial fertilizer, and antibiotics makes
        the whole enterprise more risky.  Again, heavy mechanization is needed
        to meet the demand.
    </dd>
    <dt><b>small organic</b></dt>
    <dd>
        Aka _slow food_.  Self-reliance and a focus on tightly integrated
        ecosystems.  Everything on the farm is part of a cycle.  Nothing is goes
        to waste; one thing's waste is another thing's source of nutrition.
        Each producer must optimize according to its specific circumstances,
        which creates issues of scale.
    </dd>
    <dt><b>foraging</b></dt>
    <dd>
        Picking directly from nature.  This is where we are closest to our place
        in the world's ecosystem.  Completely impractical in a modern society,
        but interesting nonetheless.
    </dd>
</dl>

My sister studied food processing and now works as part of the
industrial food chain that the author describes.  While he mentions
all the downsides of industrial food making, he also highlights how
that process strives to be always more efficient and feed everybody
at lowest cost.

I liked that the author actually went to the length visiting farms
and talking with the people involved.  Many of the issues he could
cover from a first person's perspective.  But in most cases, the
experiences are too removed from his normal life for him not to be
completely overtaken by them.  One example is when he goes hunting,
something he admits his upbringing did not prepare him for.  He gets
caught up in the thrill of his first hunt and generalizes his newfound
state of mind to something all hunters experience all the time.  From
my own experience with martial arts, I can tell that this early
exhilaration eventually quiets down and the mind clears out to go about
its business, as exemplified by his hunting buddy who stayed cool in
the action.  So some of his reflexions may be questionable, but the
book is still filled with lots of factual information and was very
informative.

Towards the end, I was reminded of one of the lessons from Antoine
de St-Exup&eacute;ry's _Little Prince_: people and things become
special to us when we spend time on them.  And this includes our food:
the more you invest of yourself in preparing a meal, the more special
it becomes and the more personal too.
