name: Pro_JavaScript_Techniques
isbn13: 9781590597279
isbn: 1590597273
title: [Pro JavaScript Techniques](http://amzn.com/1590597273)
author: John Resig
publisher: Apress
year: 2006
start: 2008-11-07
stop: 2009-01-06

A horrible book for a horrible language.  First, pretty much the entire book is
written in passive voice, making it really hard to grok.  Second, the author
often makes broad sweeping statements but never dive any deeper.  Things along
the lines of: _This bit is quite complicated but can be very powerful_, without
any further explanation.

Of course, the topic itself, JavaScript, does not help.  Everywhere you look,
you have to take into account that JavaScript works one way in IE and another
everywhere else.  Resig gives
[plenty of code to deal with the differences](http://jspro.org/),
but it is not clear if programmers wouldn't be better to use an abstraction
framework such as [Dojo](http://dojotoolkit.org/).

The books has roughly three parts.  The first part describes the language
itself and it is simply horrendous.  Very confusing, the author tries to show
everything indiscriminately.  The good is lumped in with the bad without enough
information for the reader to decide which is which.  The second part describes
manipulating the DOM.  Again, it is horrible.  Lots and lots of browser-specific
hacks.  It would have been better if the author had described one shortcoming
and then pointed to a framework that solves it and how.  Instead, he keeps
writing utility functions and builds his own vocabulary.  For one thing, it is
more procedural than OO, and it looks hastily put together.

The third part almost redeems the book.  It is a series of case studies that
show how to do AJAX in various contexts.  Here, you get to see all the pieces
at work: JavaScript, AJAX, CSS, JSON.

I can only hope that in the years since Resig wrote the book, we've made
progress in making JavaScript less horrible to work with.

<span class="newthought">Additional note:</span> it turns out Resig is the
author of [jQuery](http://jquery.com/).
