name: Serendipities_Language_and_Lunacy
isbn: 0231111347
isbn13: 9780231111348
title: [Serendipities: Language and Lunacy](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0231111347)
author: Umberto Eco
publisher: Columbia University Press
year: 1998
acquired: 2019-05-25
start: 2019-10-01
stop: 2019-10-07

In a collection of essays, Umberto Eco explores how mistaken reasoning can
nonetheless lead to important developments and discoveries.  The first essay
focuses on forgeries, but the others explore the evolution of languages and how
non-modern thinkers thought about the relationships between languages and the
dynamic forces that shape them.

This book is not light reading.  Eco covers a lot of ground in a very slim
book.  Some prior familiarity with the material would definitely help.

### The Force of Falsity

People sometimes get taken in by forgeries.  Even when something is wrong, it
can still drive people to interesting discoveries.  The letter from Prester John
helped motivate Europeans to explore East through Asia and South through Africa.
Columbus had the wrong estimate for the size of the Earth, but it motivated his
voyage of exploration that brought knowledge of the Americas to Europe.

Eco has articulated many of his novels around these forgeries and how people
decide to believe them, such as the Donation of Constantine, the letter from
Prester John, the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, the Rosicrucians & Templars &
Freemasons.

People found these constructions easier to believe than the complex reality
around them.  If Truth has a power all its own, it would seem that False has
some too.

### Languages in Paradise

Dante tried to recreate the language spoken by Adam.  He inadvertently created a
unifying Italian that would help unify the peninsula.  His ideas followed
somewhat closely those of Abulafia, a Jewish thinker.  Circa 1300, it is
unlikely they ever met one another.  But the ideas they expressed permeated the
intellectual atmosphere of the time.

### From Marco Polo to Liebniz

Misunderstandings between cultures.  Everyone interprets the world based on
their existing expectations.  Marco Polo saw a rhinoceros and could only explain
it as a unicorn.

Kircher saw hieroglyphics as a mysterious original language imbued with
mysticism.  And he saw Chinese ideograms as a degenerate version of
hieroglyphics.  And he saw Native American pictograms as the work of the Devil.

Leibniz saw in the _I Ching_ the foundation for a universal mathematical
language.  Kircher and Abulafia looked to the past for an original perfect
language.  Liebniz, instead, looks to the future and uses rules from other
existing languages to construct a new perfect language.

### The Language of the Austral Land

People in the 1600's tried to construct perfect languages.  Some of them used
combination of rules that reminded me of how we can combine emojis to produce
other emojis.  Some also reminded me of Newspeak in
[_Nineteen Eighty-Four_](http://amzn.com/0452284236).  For Eco, these are all
failures that nonetheless led to useful inventions in the Land of the Novel.

### The Linguistics of Joseph de Maistre

Joseph de Maistre had strong ideas about languages influence one another.  He
hated new forms because they were new, and he liked old forms because they were
old.  He could construct convoluted chains of reasoning to show a path between
words in different languages, but he also stopped these chains at arbitrary
mystical beliefs.
