name: Outgrowing_God
isbn: 1984853910
isbn13: 9781984853912
title: [Outgrowing God: A Beginner's Guide](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1984853910)
author: Richard Dawkins
publisher: Random House
year: 2019
acquired: 2019-10-26
start: 2020-02-13
stop: 2020-02-24

I bought a signed copy when Richard Dawkins came to my town to promote the book.

The book is definitely aimed at young people.  Dawkins assumes his reader knows
very little, and at times sounds downright condescending.  But he does keep the
material very accessible while still covering all his bases.   I like how he
will often mention a topic and then quickly say how it is beyond the scope of
his book.  The reader can research that topic at their own leisure.

Where it counts, he does dig deeper.  Like when he compares the standard for
evidence from Carl Sagan (extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence)
to that from Laplace (the weight of evidence for an extraordinary claim must be
proportioned to its strangeness) and that of David Hume (which is more likely,
that it really happened or that the witness is mistaken?).

The first part of the book shows the arbitrary nature of religious beliefs and
how moral philosophy can be just as effective.  The second part covers the
scientific method through the specific example of how the theory of evolution
through natural selection explains life's diversity in spite its complexity.
I liked how he progressed from how crystals self-assemble to how reactions in
cells are governed by enzymes, which are proteins formed by DNA instructions.
How all life is an emergent property of a really complex system of bottom-up,
simple _programming_.  It would require a lot of studying, but I'm curious how
scientists figured out all these steps.

There is an evolutionary advantage to believing false positives, because our
distant ancestors who believed false negatives got eaten by predators or were
otherwise removed from the gene pool.
