name: Single_Page_Web_Applications
isbn: 1617290750
isbn13: 9781617290756
title: [Single Page Web Applications](http://amzn.com/1617290750)
author: Michael Mikowski
author: Josh Powell
publisher: Manning
year: 2014
acquired: 2014-09-05
start: 2014-11-20
stop: 2015-01-20

Single page applications are all the rage these days.  I figured this book could
help me make sense of it all.  I'm particularly interested in
[AngularJS](https://angularjs.org/), but it never came up in the book.

The book walks you through all the steps to build a fully functional chat
application.  It shows client-side interactions, abstracting a data layer,
communicating with a server to exchange messages, and storing user profiles in a
database on the server.  The example is just complex enough to showcase all the
steps without drawing too much attention to itself.

Overall, it's a decent walkthrough of DIY single page apps.  If you want to
build a professional app, though, you might be better off with Dojo or some of
the frameworks out there.  This will not become a reference book that I will get
back to very often.

### Pros

Throughout, the authors show you step-by-step how to write the code for all of
the components.  They do a great job of starting with a barebone template and
filling in the functionality gradually.  They use bold text judiciously to show
the differences between each successive iteration of the development.

In the app, they use the URL itself to store the state of the app.  This lets
the app lean on the browser's history mechanism to handle the back button and
other navigation.

The authors mention "fractal MVC" as a means to structure the parts of the
application.  The idea is great in principle, if the lower layers are completely
encapsulated in their enclosing component.  A container shouldn't have to dig
into the details of its components.  But they messed it up by having the
top-level shell control everything in the lower layers.

There is a great introduction of [node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) and why it
is well suited for use with Socket.IO for client-server communication.  Without
getting bogged down in technical details, they make a case for resource
management and how it is more lightweight than regular TCP connections.

There is also a good introduction to MongoDB and how to connect it to node.js.
Again, it is just enough to wet the appetite and start playing with the
database.

### Cons

Much of the writing is really juvenile.  The lead ins are repetitive and often
condescending.  There are a few attempts at humor but they feel forced and fall
flat.  The whole just feels unprofessional and reduces their credibility.

They write their own custom frontend framework instead of relying on more
widespread technology.  They complain that current frameworks all have tradeoffs
that they were not comfortable with and that they wanted to show the inner
workings of a web framework.  They end up having to build a lot of
infrastructure and deploy patterns that are not trivial to understand.  And
because they build their framework incrementally, it is not clear where they are
going.

The flows of control get so complicated that they could really have used some
sequence and/or collaboration diagrams.  I got lost in all the inter-module
communication.

Throughout, the authors rely exclusively on manual testing.  They build a piece
of functionality and then try it out in a browser or make calls to the server
using `curl`.  There is an appendix that delves into automated testing, but it
feels like a bolted on late addition.
