name: Talking_to_Strangers
isbn: 0316478520
isbn13: 9780316478526
title: [Talking to Strangers](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0316478520)
author: Malcolm Gladwell
publisher: Little, Brown and Company
year: 2019
acquired: 2019-10-04
start: 2020-01-29
stop: 2020-02-11

Malcolm Gladwell's latest book, about "the tools and strategies we use to make
sense of people we don't know."  It deals with communication, and how we
interpret signals we're getting from others.  The strategies we use on people we
are familiar with do not work on strangers.  I was curious to see how much it
would overlap with Umberto Eco's
_The Role of the Reader_ or the ideas in Milan Kundera's
[_Testaments Betrayed_](#Les_testaments_trahis).

Gladwell starts  with the
[illusion of asymmetric insight](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illusion_of_asymmetric_insight),
where we're underestimate other people's ability to know others when they apply
it to us, and overestimate this ability in ourselves when we apply it to others.
This is a social
[cognitive bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cognitive_biases)
that is somewhat related to
[fundamental attribution error](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_attribution_error).
Fundamental attribution error is about explaining behaviors; illusion of
asymmetric insight is about perceived knowledge.  Wikipedia has a nice
[brain map](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Cognitive_bias_codex_en.svg)
showing all the biases and how they relate to each other.

It turns out that when someone tells us something, we assume it is true.
Psychologist Tim Levine calls it the _Truth-Default Theory_.  We gain a lot by
trusting one another, much more than the cost of the occasional swindle.  The
alternative is that we never trust anyone and remain paralysed by paranoia.
Unfortunately, modern policing works against this default to truth: police
officers end up suspecting everyone of criminal activity, which erodes the
public's trust.

> A police officer approaches a civilian on the flimsiest of pretexts, looking
> for a needle in a haystack -- with the result that so many innocent people are
> caught up in the wave of suspicion that trust between police and community is
> obliterated.
> <footer>p. 336</footer>

In a number of case studies, Gladwell demonstrates the dangers of defaulting to
truth.  From spy networks to financial scams to sexual abuse cases, there is a
very real cost to it.  But we have to remember that the cost of its opposite is
even much, much greater.

> The issue with spies is not that there is something brilliant about them.  It
> is that there is something wrong with us.
> <footer>p. 68</footer>

The Sandusky case hinged on fuzzy memories.  Repressed memories, and profiteers
trying to take advantage of the settlement, cast doubts on the witnesses.  The
Larry Nassar cas was pretty a very clear cut , and still people had doubts.
Defaulting to truth is even easier when the alternative is horrible.

> The right question is: were there enough red flags to push you over the
> threshold of belief?  If there weren't, then by defaulting to truth you were
> only being human.
> <footer>p. 79</footer>

Gladwell follows with a discussion of _transparency_.

> Transparency is the idea that people's behavior and demeanor [...] provides
> [...] the way they feel inside.  It is the second of the crucial tools we use
> to make sense of strangers.  When we don't know someone, [...] we believe we
> can make sense of them through their behavior and demeanor.
> <footer>p. 152</footer>

And it's all wrong.  We know that our own body language does not exactly reflect
how we feel inside.  This is even more pronounced when dealing with other
cultures, where we make bad assumptions regarding their body language.  We are
bad at interpreting people's cues when they don't match what we'd expect.  We
find a lots of false positive and false negatives when there are mismatched
expectations of transparency.  Even experts like law enforcement officers.

Gladwell takes a look at the impact that alcohol could have played is some
sexual assault cases, such as the Brock Turner case.  Some psychologists talk of
alcohol as an agent of myopia.  It keeps us from making long-term calculations,
such as understanding the ramifications of our immediate actions.  It keeps us
in the here and now at the expense of consequences.  Drinking in the
hyper-sexualized context of a party invites promiscuity.

> Is drunken consent still consent?  It has to be, the ruling goes on.
> Otherwise the vast majority of people happily having sex while drunk belong in
> jail alongside the small number of people for whom having sex while drunk
> constituted a criminal act.
> <footer>p. 213</footer>

> If M can say that she was not responsible for her decisions because she was
> drunk, why couldn't Benjamin Bree say the same thing?
> <footer>p. 213</footer>

Alcohol makes us less likely to present our true selves, therefore sending
signals to others that will be misinterpreted.  In extreme cases, the results
can be dire.

The last topic covered by Gladwell is _coupling_.  Certain behaviors, such as
crime or suicide, are tied to a place or a specific set of factors.  If you
remove the means, the behavior does not move elsewhere, it simply disappears.
Efforts to fight crime can make effective use of suspending the default to
truth, but only if they are focused on the few locations where most crimes
happen.  Otherwise, you risk recreating the case of Sandra Bland where the
police officer didn't default to truth and assumed transparency in an area where
it was not warranted, turning him into a paranoid delusional and with tragic
consequences.

Malcolm Gladwell is always a good read.  He has a real talent for presenting his
material and weaves a good story.  But if we're being somewhat skeptical, we
have to wonder at how perfectly the pieces of his puzzle fit together.  He has a
lengthy bibliography, but his evidence is hand-picked to support his hypotheses.
I would have liked to see more counter-evidence that he could have debunked to
make his points even stronger, by showing how they can be attacked and how they
respond to it.  For now, we have to take Gladwell at his word.  I'll reserve my
final judgement for when there is more corroborating evidence.  But I'm sure
these theories of Truth-Default and transparency and coupling will keep bouncing
around in my head for some time to come.
