name: Agile_Software_Development_Cockburn
isbn13: 9780321482754
isbn: 0321482751
title: [Agile Software Development: The Cooperative Game, Second Edition](http://amzn.com/0321482751)
author: Alistair Cockburn
publisher: Addison Wesley
year: 2007
start: 2007-01-12
stop: 2007-01-31

I read the first edition early in 2003 and I really enjoyed it.
The chapters on the theory of communication were very thought
provoking and resonated well with what I had read about
communication from Umberto Eco.  At work, our agile user group has
been looking for a volunteer to read the second edition and to do a
book review, so I volunteered.  That's when I learned I would have
one week to read a 467-page book and do my review.  Somebody wish
me luck.

It took me three weeks, but I made it.  Cockburn was kind enough
to put the new material in separate chapters and highlight those in
the margin.  Chapter 1 is followed by chapter 1.1 with new
additions to the material in chapter 1.  So on and so forth for
chapters 2, 3, and following.  This way, I was able to look at a
large part of the new material in time for my one week deadline and
still provide a report that was useful.  Now that I've gone through
all of the book, I can do a more complete report.

The operative word should have been _adaptive_.  The
process or methodology must adapt to the team and its environment.
This includes the people making up the team but also the cultural
and political landscape in which it operates.

Cockburn has two key points.  First, _there's only us._
We're all in this together, including suppliers, customers,
management, sponsors, QA, etc.  Second, the team must reflect
periodically.  You won't get it right the first time, or even the
second or third for that matter.  You must reflect on the current
situation and make adjustments as needed.  Many small adjustments
over time have a better chance of success than one big-bang
change.

Back when I first read the book, and this time too, I really
liked the early chapters on the nature of communication and what
the author calls _osmotic communication_.  It worked very
nicely with what I've read on the subject by Umberto Eco and Milan
Kundera.  These chapters reinforce the idea that we cannot convey
a complex system of ideas perfectly in one communication event.  We
have to establish a dialog, be it with the requirements, the code,
partners, etc.

Throughout the book, Cockburn keeps bringing up the concept of
_Shu-Ha-Ri_, three levels of learning common in martial
arts.  "Shu" is the beginner who is looking for one proven way to
get something done.  "Ha" is the experienced practioner who is
looking to grow their toolkit.  "Ri" is the expert who is looking
at the underlying principles, where specific techniques don't
matter anymore.  The author constantly contrasts the needs of
Shu-level and Ri-level individuals.  We must take it into
consideration in our communications, with each other and with people
outside the team.

Figure 2.1-2 is a very nice illustration of the fractal nature
of iterative development.  By opposition, figure 5.1-9 is complete
crap.  There is nothing on the x-axis and the y-axis therefore
becomes irrelevant.  The slope on the data line is completely
artificial and the logarithmic scale on the y-axis is purely for
effect.  This is pure propaganda and is totally unsupported.

Aside from figure 5.1-9, this is a very insightful book and I
highly recommend it.
