name: Chronicles_of_a_Liquid_Society
isbn: 1328505855
isbn13: 9781328505859
title: [Chronicles of a Liquid Society](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1328505855)
title: <i>Pape Sat&agrave;n Aleppe. Cronache di una societ&agrave; liquida</i>
author: Umberto Eco
publisher: Mariner Books
year: 2016
year: 2017
acquired: 2019-05-25
start: 2021-07-18
stop: 2021-09-04

Eco takes an eclectic collection of articles and tries to arrange them by theme.
Each section loosely binds a few somewhat related articles together, ordered
chronologically in each section.  Many themes recur between the sections.
Things that were not separated by time when they were first published end up
separated by space, their relationship obscured to the reader.   The constantly
resetting timeline is also confusing.  The overall result is well worth the
read, but it is still quite erratic.

The book would greatly benefit from a thematic index to cross-reference
individual topics across essays and sections.  For example, Aldo Moro, or
Hypathia of Alexandria, or the dumbing down effect of social media.  All appear
again and again, but separated by other topics.  By the time we return to one
topic, the reader has forgotten the specifics of what had been said before.

The _liquid society_ of the title is the contemporary Western society post-World
War II.  Eco contends that previous epochs were driven by identifiable
philosophical currents, be it scolasticism, romanticism, or fascism.  But our
today's society seems devoid of any specific ideological underpinning, flowing
freely wherever the masses focus their attention.  I think hindsight is 20/20,
that past societies didn't see what they were in the middle of, and that some
future historian may well see a common thread in today's modes of thinking.

In the arts, in philosophy, in politics, the book draws interesting comparisons
between how we look at things now versus the preoccupations of those who came
before us.  Eco often compares things now with how they were in his youth.
There is a tinge on nostalgia and a drop of "Back in my days, we knew how to
appreciate things."

While focusing on books, Eco explores the role of the arts in conveying ideas,
and how timing (and context) is almost as important as the contents themselves.

> What lies at the base of the European cultural identity is a long dialogue
> among literatures, philosophies, and musical and theatrical works.
> <footer>p. 158</footer>

Milan Kundera also touched on how the arts, and specifically the novel, tie
together the European identity.

> Ideally every text should be read twice, first to know what is said, second to
> appreciate how it is said, and from there to obtain the full aesthetic
> enjoyment.
> <footer>p. 111</footer>

In my opinion, the same goes for movies and some television shows.

I didn't know that Cyrano de Bergerac was a real person, and that the play by
Edmond Rostand is loosely based on him.

There are many places where Eco discusses how a secular Europe is trying to come
to grip with religions and reconcile them into its secular plan.

> Those against [Europe's Christian origins] think above all about the Europe of
> tomorrow, which is destined to become a multi-ethnic continent, and where an
> explicit reference to Christian roots could halt the process on  integration
> ...
> <footer>p. 177</footer>

> the idea of religion as an _instrumentum regni_, an expedient that a political
> power, perhaps represented by unbelievers, uses to maintain control over  its
> subjects.
> <footer>p. 194</footer>

On revealed truths and personal revelations as proof of the divine:

> every seer sees what his culture has taught him to see.
> <footer>p. 177</footer>

It's funny to have Eco refer to Cardinal Ratzinger, just a few years before he
would become pope.

Eco's fascination for conspiracy theories naturally led him to their latest
incarnation:

> In 1956, ... Samuel Shenton, founded the Flat Earth Society to continue the
> legacy of the Universal Zetetic Society.
> <footer>p. 292</footer>

And how to deal with them:

> carry the ideas of others to an extreme and they'll be laughed out of
> existence.
> <footer>p. 300</footer>

I'll end with a quote that resonates with Malcolm Gladwell's
[_Talking to Strangers_](#Talking_to_Strangers).

> If we could no longer trust anyone ... we'd become permanently paranoid.
> <footer>p.302</footer>
