name: Breaking_the_Spell
isbn: 067003472X
title: [Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon](http://amzn.com/067003472X)
author: Daniel C. Dennett
publisher: Viking
year: 2006
start: 2006-05-09
stop: 2006-06-09

The author takes a critical look at religion as a human, natural
phenomenon, subject to forces from the natural world.  In the
opening chapters, he goes to great lengths to appear
non-threatening to religious people, trying to convince them that
their religion is deserving of a critical look.  It's a very
different style from other stuff I have read where the author is
usually much more straight-forward (e.g., Noam Chomsky or Milan
Kundera).

On the same day I started reading this book, which proposes to
apply the scientific method to the study of religion's evolution, I
attended a talk by [Kevin Kelly](http://kk.org) on the
history of the scientific method and it will likely continue to
develop in the next 50 years.  Nice coincidence.

Dennett proposes that religion evolved following the mechanisms
of memetics.  Various memes compete for survival within human
culture and the _fittest_ perpetuate across generations.
Following this view, if a meme, an idea, is too foreign to be
transmitted unchanged from one generation to the next, it will only
result in a short-lived cult that will most likely not survive its
founder.  If, on the other hand, the meme is very useful (or
_perceived_ useful) to its hosts, it will be passed on to
descendants and thrive.  As situations changes, new memes are
introduced and old ones die.  Dennett proceeds to examine many
elements of religious experiences, from folk religions and shamans
to organized religions with controlling bodies, and determines for
each element what may have given rise to it, what conditions are
needed for it to thrive, and how many of them may have combined to
lead to today's religious landscape.

Since the word _atheist_ has a bad rep, he mentions that
increasingly, non-religious people are referring to themselves as
_brights_, much in the same way that homosexuals refer to
themselves as _gays_.  They do not imply by this that
non-brights are the opposite of _bright_, much like non-gays
are not _sad_, they're _straight_.

The style of the book takes some getting used to, at least for
me who is not used to the Socratic method.  Most assertions are put
down as rhetorical questions, so you're never sure if the author is
opening a new line of questioning or closing an old one.  Also, the
presentation style lacks an establishing section at the beginning.
So as you follow the author through his reasonings, it is not
always obvious where he's leading you.  At the end of the section,
there is a QED that often takes you by surprise.  If he had laid
down his goals at the onset, I would have been in a better position
to appreciate how each step lead me in that direction, instead of
being taken by surprise by his conclusions.

<span class="newthought">Note:</span> Dennett passed away on
[2024-04-19](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/19/books/daniel-dennett-dead.html).
