name: Animal_Farm
isbn: 0451526341
isbn13: 9780451526342
title: [Animal Farm](http://amzn.com/0451526341)
author: George Orwell
publisher: Signet Classic
year: 1946
start: 2007-06-14
stop: 2007-06-20

Short and to the point.

Orwell shows again his theory of revolutions where the middle class (pigs)
harness the lower class (other animals) to overthrow the upper class (humans),
but only to put themselves as the new upper class.  For the lower class, nothing
changes.  Orwell will expound further on this principle in
[_Nineteen Eighty-Four_](http://amzn.com/0452284236).

It is quite obvious that Napoleon refers to Stalin and Snowball to Trotsky, but
I wonder if Orwell was thinking of anyone else in particular with other
characters like Squealer or Boxer or Minimus, or Benjamin.  Most of the other
named characters are most likely just generic proles.  But Benjamin with his
long memory and Boxer with his unwavering devotion to Napoleon stand out from
the crowd and could very well refer to preeminent participants of the Communist
Revolution.

> It turns out the
> [Wikipedia article on Animal Farm](http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Animal_farm)
> confirms and expands on my initial thoughts.

I like how right from day one, Napoleon is already scheming and doing things
behind the backs of the other animals, such as the business with the milk.  He
is also very quick to get the pigs preferential treatment on the grounds that
their work is so much more important than anybody else's.  Right from the start,
the other animals didn't stand a chance.

In this book, Orwell shows how the Revolution's transition happens and how the
new status quo is achieved.  In _Nineteen Eighty-Four_, he will show how this
status quo is maintained, at least for a while.
