name: Meditations
isbn: 0140449337
isbn13: 9780140449334
title: [Meditations](http://a.co/3AzFC0V)
author: Marcus Aurelius
author: Martin Hammond
publisher: Penguin Classics
year: 161-180
year: 2006
acquired: 2017-10-14
start: 2018-01-01
stop: 2018-03-01

Marcus Aurelius is a major figure of the Stoics.  This book looked like a recent
translation with an introduction and lots of notes.

This text is nearly 2,000 years old.  It has stood the test of time and it
has been studied by many, many scholars.  Whatever critique I might have, I must
remember to weigh it against the opinions of all these learned people that have
reflected on these meditations over the centuries.

On the other hand, neither Marcus Aurelius nor most of these learned scholars
have any notion of psychology.  Or medicine and diseases and microbes.  Or
modern Physics.

The writing style feels a lot like stream of consciousness.  Marcus Aurelius
switches back and forth between topics and revisits the same thoughts in
multiple _books_.  I had to constantly remind myself that he was writing to
himself, not to some hypothetical reader.  This is a Roman emperor writing to a
Roman emperor, not to an ordinary citizen.

Marcus Aurelius often contrasts Epicurus (we are assemblies of atoms, we should
seek out pleasures and avoid pain) and Epitectus (we should be indifferent to
external events).  But instead of trying to reconcile them, he holds both views
at the same time and shows how they both lead to the same end (see 6.10).

One recurring theme is that each one of us us but a part of the larger universe
as a whole.  We are doing _good_ when we are fulfilling our role in that larger
whole, and _bad_ when we act against that goal.  The whole does not concern
itself with the fate of individual parts, and it is sometimes necessary for the
part to suffer for the benefit of the whole.  Much like an individual soldier's
death may be their part in the overall victory.

> All that happens to the individual is to the benefit of the Whole.
> <footer>6.45</footer>

> What does not benefit the hive does not benefit the bee either.
> <footer>6.54</footer>

> Whatever position a man has taken up in his own best judgement, or is assigned
> by his commander, there, it seems to me, he should stay and face the danger,
> giving no thought to death or anything else before dishonor.
> <footer>7.45</footer>

This last quote is actually Marcus Aurelius quoting Plato, who was himself
quoting Socrates.

Another theme is that the universe is in constant renewal.  The cycle of birth,
life, and death is a natural part of that.  The universe can only create new
forms by breaking down and recycling old ones.  Each one of us is but a tiny
portion of space and time out of the entire universe, and quite insignificant
all by our own.

> Universal nature uses the substance of the universe like wax, making now the
> model of a horse, then melting it down and using its material for a tree; next
> for a man; next for something else.  Each one of these subsists for only the
> briefest time.
> <footer>7.23</footer>

> The wind scatters one year's leaves on the ground ... so it is with the
> generations of men.  [...]  All these 'come round in the season of Spring':
> but then the wind blows them down, and the forest 'puts out others' in their
> stead.
> <footer>10.34</footer>

Marcus Aurelius has a hierarchy from the inanimate, to animate, to conscious, to
rational beings (7.55).  Not everyone actually lives up to being rational, and are
therefore not fulfilling their full potential.  The duty of rational beings is
to help one another and pursue the designs of the universe, so we need to be
forgiving of each other's shortcomings.

> Live out your life in truth and justice, tolerant of those who are neither
> true nor just.
> <footer>6.47</footer>

> [...] do not dwell on all the various troubles which may have occurred in the
> past or may occur in the future.  Just ask yourself in each instance of the
> present: 'What is there in this work which I cannot endure or support?'
> <footer>8.36</footer>

> To be angry with them is no less a weakness than to abandon your course of
> action and capitulate in panic.
> <footer>11.9</footer>

> If it is not right, don't do it: if it is not true, don't say it.
> <footer>12.17</footer>

And I like how he extols us to seek intrinsic satisfaction in our actions,
instead of insisting on extrinsic rewards.  Fame is short-lived and not worth
it.  It is better to seek satisfaction in being one with the universe by playing
the part assigned to us.

> [...] you do not yet love your fellow men from your heart: doing good does not
> yet delight you as an end in itself; you are still doing it as a mere duty,
> not yet as a kindness to yourself.
> <footer>7.13</footer>

> The fault is clearly your own, [...] if you conferred a favour without making
> it an end in itself, your very action its own end and complete reward.
> <footer>9.42.4</footer>

> [...] it is madness to expect bad men to do no wrong: that is asking for the
> impossible.  But it is cruel tyranny to allow them such behaviour to others
> while demanding that they do no wrong to you.
> <footer>11.18.11</footer>

> At their festivals the Spartans would put seats for visitors in the shade, and
> sit themselves wherever they could.
> <footer>11.24</footer>

Even if at times a little ironic.

> [...] you will find it quite easy to face death if you stop to consider the
> business you will be leaving and the sort of characters which will no longer
> contaminate your soul.
> <footer>9.3.2</footer>

In the duality of mind and body, the directing mind reigns supreme.  It must not
get distracted by the body and it is solely responsible for itself.  Marcus
Aurelius believed that external events could only influence the directing mind
if it chooses to let them do so.  I'm not sure what he would say about modern
psychological methods, but he definitely thought you could retreat into your
mind and ignore anything you choose.

> The mind adapts and turns round any obstacle to action to serve its objective:
> a hinderance to a given work is turned to its furtherance, an obstacle in a
> given path becomes an advance.
> <footer>5.20</footer>

> All that happens is an event either within your natural ability to bear it, or
> not.  So if it is an event within that ability, do not complain, but bear it
> as you were born to.  If outside that ability, do not complain either: it will
> take you away before you have a chance for complaint.  Remember, though, that
> you are by nature born to bear all that your own judgement can decide
> bearable, or tolerate in action, if you represent it to yourself as benefit or duty.
> <footer>10.3</footer>

> [...] 'clarity of mind' was meant to signify for you discriminating attention
> to various detail and vigorous thought; 'a cooperating mind' the willing
> acceptance of the dispensation on the universal nature; 'independence of mind'
> the elevation of your thinking faculty above the calm or troubled affections
> of the flesh, above paltry fame or death or any other indifferent thing.
> <footer>10.8</footer>

While the translation and commentary are brilliant, there were a few chapters
(6.26, 7.17, 7.24, 10.7) where the meaning seemed obvious to me but Hammond
would call it _obscure_ and say he was _uncertain what Marcus meant there_.
These often dealt with the discriminating mind asserting dominion over emotions,
not succumbing to anger or distraction or bad habit.

One last quote:

> For lack of practice the left hand is awkward for most tasks, but has a
> stronger grip on the bridle than the right - it is practised in this.
> <footer>12.6</footer>

Here, Marcus Aurelius is not saying that the left hand is good for nothing, but
rather that we must keep practising if we want to get better.  We are good at
the things we practise; whether that's horse riding for him or kendo for me.

A few stats:

<div class="container">
    <div class="header">Book</div>
    <div class="header">Chapters</div>
    <div class="header">Pages</div>
    <div class="header">Notes</div>
    <div>1</div><div>17</div><div>7</div><div>8</div>
    <div>2</div><div>17</div><div>6</div><div>9</div>
    <div>3</div><div>16</div><div>7</div><div>5</div>
    <div>4</div><div>51</div><div>12</div><div>7</div>
    <div>5</div><div>37</div><div>11</div><div>8</div>
    <div>6</div><div>59</div><div>12</div><div>11</div>
    <div>7</div><div>75</div><div>13</div><div>7</div>
    <div>8</div><div>61</div><div>12</div><div>8</div>
    <div>9</div><div>42</div><div>11</div><div>8</div>
    <div>10</div><div>38</div><div>11</div><div>6</div>
    <div>11</div><div>39</div><div>10</div><div>8</div>
    <div>12</div><div>36</div><div>8</div><div>6</div>
</div>

There are 90 pages of notes for 122 pages of text.
