name: The_Ministry_for_the_Future
isbn: 0316300136
isbn13: 9780316300131
title: [The Ministry for the Future](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0316300136)
author: Kim Stanley Robinson
publisher: Orbit Books
year: 2020
acquired: 2020-12-25
start: 2021-01-03
stop: 2021-01-30

I received this book as a Christmas present.  It is set in a future severely
impacted by climate change.  A strange mix of Arthur C. Clarke and Michael
Crichton.

The book came out in 2020, but it doesn't mention the COVID-19 pandemic, though
it does hint at economic troubles in 2020.  I suspect the manuscript was mostly
completed by 2019 and by the time the pandemic hit, there was not enough time to
do large edits.

The book came out in 2020 and the action starts in 2025.  Trying to predict the
near future usually doesn't age well.  Clarke would pick one concept and project
how it would impact multiple segments of society.  He could pull it off by
painting broad strokes.  Instead, Robinson attempts to show multiple angles, in
somewhat fine details, depicting how the human race can make an ecological turn
around.

Many times, Robinson has those with little power rise and take on the powers
that be.  He builds on the _gilets jaunes_ movement in France, and we saw an
example of this strategy with GameStop trading recently.  But the novel
dismisses the means the elites use to control the population: fakenews,
(White) nationalism, the insurrection at the US Capitol.  Also, Robinson piles
on one disruption after another, where each single one could have a severe
impact on the world economy, so much that context for the next disruption would
likely no longer exist.  They are meant to build on one another, but each would
be so disruptive that there would be nothing left for the next link in the chain
to build upon.  Also, Robinson seems to think the rentier class is suffering
from a "horrible psychic burden." (p. 320), which shows he does not really
understand the sense of entitlement of this social class.

The writing style seems a little contemporary cookie-cutter: touristy locations,
descriptions out of travel brochures, showy vocabulary.  It didn't feel like a
personal expression on the part of the author, but more like a renowned author
cranking out one novel a year, every year, by following the same general recipe.
Some of it feels quite forced: "the inchoate fractured resistance of victims"
(p.25), "fuligin black humor" (p. 35), "oxbow" instead of meander on page 166,
"feebate" (p. 174), "bailiwick" (p. 175), "seigniorage" (p. 187), "sastrugi"
(p. 258), "siccing" (p.287).  But, you also get gems like:

> Evolution itself will of course refill all these emptied ecological niches
> with new species.  The pre-existing plenitude of speciation will be restored
> in less than twenty million years.
> <footer>p. 44</footer>

and also the beautiful hospice death:

> "They often slip away when no one's around.  Seems like some of them want it
> to be that way.  A kind of privacy, you know."
> <footer>p. 496</footer>

The carbon cycle, from the point of view of a carbon atom, was very cute, too.

A funny misquoting of Tennyson:

> To live, to fight, to strive, to something, and not to yield.
> <footer>p. 509</footer>

Chapter 85 is a list, much in the spirit of Umberto Eco's
[_The Infinity of Lists_](#The_Infinity_of_Lists).  I would have appreciated it
a lot less if I had not been primed by Eco.

I had to lookup some of the concepts, which are real, such as the Gini
coefficient and Mondrag&oacute;n.  And I enjoyed following the characters on
Google Maps through India or Zurich.  Chapter 32 talks about discount rates for
the future value of things, something about which I had just read
[an essay by Kent Beck](https://medium.com/@kentbeck_7670/extreme-time-value-of-money-late-stage-career-planning-7f3b82214cf5)
not two days before I hit that part of the book.

Crichton does (science) teams better.  He is also better at showing the humanity
in the team members.  Robinson's characters are very one-dimensional.  Mary gets
a tiny bit of development, but too little, too late.  Frank is a mess, but that
is part of his character, I guess.

The novel mixes events at the Ministry for the Future with random anecdotes.
Clarke does it better by keeping the action related between all the parts.
With Robinson, what happened at the Ministry was too disconnected from what was
happening elsewhere.  Plus, for a government-like agency, there was not enough
turnover in its members.  The team that set it up at the beginning is still in
place many years later.  No one moved on, no one retired, no new blood to inject
fresh ideas.  For decades.

We know the novel starts in 2025, but we don't really have a scale of time as
events unfold.  We might have had a better sense of time scales if the author
had anchored key plot points to specific years and seasons.

I find it worrisome that Mary had Badim run the black wing of the Ministry, for
plausible deniability and all that.  But when the time came for him to take her
place, he felt the rules didn't apply anymore, or at least, not to him.  Does he
feel that **he** can make it work, when he spent quite some time convincing Mary
(and the reader) that it never works without that separation.  Or, was he trying
to say that the black ops were no longer necessary?  There could be very dark
days ahead for the Ministry if Badim turns out to be corrupt.
