name: Working_Effectively_with_Legacy_Code
isbn13: 9780131177055
isbn: 0131177052
title: [Working Effectively with Legacy Code](http://amzn.com/0131177052)
author: Michael Feathers
publisher: Prentice Hall
year: 2005
start: 2005-02-08
stop: 2005-03-16

Lots of very practical advice on how to take already existing
code and bring it under test.  The author offers many techniques
for minimal code transformations that allow you to write tests
against the code.  Once the tests are in place, you are in a better
position to launch larger refactorings.  While the transformations
work better on objet-oriented code, many apply just as well to
procedural code.

The introduction to test-driven development is very nice.  The
example feels genuine, not just a contrived example piece of code
that bears no relation to your actual code.  This one guides you
through a few iterations to show how the amount of work and
refactoring vary from one to the next.

The tone tries to remain casual and engaging, but it seemed
forced in places.  [Martin Fowler](MartinFowler.html)
and Robert C. Martin have had more practice at walking the fine
line between humour that helps the medicine go down versus humour
that's besides the point.  But still, the quality of the advice
more than makes up for any stylistic shortfalls.

I really liked the notion of _effect sketches_ and
_feature sketches_.  They relate strongly to the transitive
closures that I compute using
[Dependency Finder](https://dependencyfinder.jeantessier.com/).
My tool works automatically and will miss some impacts
whereas the author derives his sketches manually.  Maybe the tool
can help guide the manual process and make sure it covers all
dependencies.
