name: Waltzing_with_Bears
isbn: 0932633609
title: [Waltzing with Bears: Managing Risk on Software Projects](http://amzn.com/0932633609)
author: Tom DeMarco
author: Timothy Lister
publisher: Dorset House
year: 2003
start: 2004-10-14
stop: 2004-10-27

The guys from [_Peopleware_](http://amzn.com/0932633439)
are at it again.  This time, they tackle the management attitude that plays the
ostrich and keeps its head in the sand, denying reality instead of facing it.
They are making a case for knowing what risks lie ahead, how to notice them, and
how to prepare for their possible occurrence.

In their usual style, the authors keep things light and simple, yet offer quick
and easy rules to get you going.  The book is peppered with anecdotes taken from
their professional experience.  You can start applying the advice from the book
immediately and get results right away.

Their approach to quantifying risk through simulation has its detractors (see
reader comments on Amazon), but I think the very simple act of listings the
risks and their associated contingencies (what to do when a risk manifests
itself) and mediation (preparation ahead of time) are already a big step forward
from mere wishful thinking.  It helped me keep some of these risks in mind and
stay on the lookout for their manifestation.  I, too, would question a
proposition that says:
_the math for this is too complicated for you, but trust our handy little Excel spreadsheet._
But the book is still very much worth the read and contains a lot of fair
advice.
