name: Axioms_End
isbn: 1250256739
isbn13: 9781250256737
title: [Axiom's End](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1250256739)
author: Lindsay Ellis
publisher: St. Martin's Press
year: 2020
acquired: 2020-07-03
start: 2020-07-21
stop: 2020-07-28

This is the first novel by
[Lindsay Ellis](https://www.youtube.com/user/chezapoctube).  She normally does
video essays on YouTube about various elements of pop culture.  She likes
_The Lord of the Rings_, as do I.  But then again, she also likes Transformers
and Michael Bay movies.

I saw her [essay about getting published](https://youtu.be/tuRE55YH8yE), and it
got me curious what her novel ended up looking like.

I was apprehensive at the beginning.  A first novel by someone that I know more
for audiovisual arts.  The prose was not remarkable.  But by page 60, I found
myself hooked.  The real action hadn't even started, yet, but I wanted to tag
along and find out more.

### Is It Genuine Or a Parody?

I struggled a lot with how  I felt about this book.  Back in 2013, Lindsay Ellis
and her associates wrote a parody of a young adult novel, _Awoken_.  They
documented their process in a
[series of videos about writing their novel](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLJGOq3JclTH-2qkpzIPg_rpIiyhlLInjw)
as an experiment in community-driven collaborative writing.

In the process, they made fun of many narrative elements that find echoes in
_Axiom's End_.  This led me to wonder if Ellis might have written this novel as
a joke, too.  A young heroine with almost no agency.  An alien boyfriend who
must hide his true nature.  Everyone thinks he's dangerous, but she knows
better.  He's manipulative and controlling.  She is quite chaste, and ethnic.
The absent parents.  Humanity live in a bubble, unaware of the  much larger and
very dangerous universe.  Names like ROSA and Demetria.  Throw in random
references to Harry Potter and Star Wars, so the nerds will lap it up.  Soul
bonding.

Every piece that I might find engaging, I would question whether the author was
really engaging with the reader or just pandering.

I _want_ to say that I liked it.  And I want to engage and dive into where I
would have wanted more plot.  But what if I'm being played for a fool?  Did
Ellis write this on a lark?  Is it all just a trap?

I will choose to take it as a serious effort at literature and move on.

### What Is It About?

My alien boyfriend.

In the book, the "axiom" is that amygdalines believe they are the only developed
intelligence in the universe.  And the same goes for humanity.  Both cultures
will have to reconcile with the fact that it is no longer true.

### Things I Liked About It

The framing device, with "articles" around Nils Ortega, providing an ersatsz
Anonymous and Julian Assange, WikiLeaks and Edward Snowden.  It was a clever way
to provide an alternate point of view and introduce an additional narrative that
would not have been known to the main protagonist.

How Cora used editorial license when translating in order to a) bridge the two
cultures and b) serve her own agenda.  She showed a little agency here.  It
sustained our interests during the translation episodes because we never knew
what spin she would put on things.

This bit had me in stitches:

> Black olives.  The answer to the eternal quandary of what if one were to
> combine snails and old tires into foodstuff.  The only way the creature could
> have punished her more brutally was if it had forced celery on her.
> <footer>p. 97</footer>

And Ellis managed to plug her essays on the Transformers movie:

> The _whole_ plate.
> <footer>p. 131</footer>

All the alien names were taken from some arbitrary, human-based naming scheme.
The aliens didn't bother to correct it and preferred to just go with it instead
of spending all the energy to explain their own.  It kept the names _alien_
without making them hard on the reader.

The linguistic issues with communicating between cultures was nicely done.  The
movie _Arrival_ has dealt with the very low-level issue of phonemes and grammar.
This story looks at it more from the semantic angle.  Much like the episode
_Darmok_ in Star Trek: TNG.  Even in places where communication completely
breaks down:

> Despite zero mutual understanding, they seemed to be on the same page about it
> being nice to have someone to talk at, if not talk to.
> <footer>p. 296</footer>

Princess Leia had a lot of agency.  She made her the character to emulate in
Star Wars.

> Leia was up and ready at a moment's notice.  She even had to help them shoot
> their way out of this.
> <footer>p. 212</footer>

Ampersand's attempts at being a caretaker.  I thought the bit about the
expression "Do you consent?" really worked well.

The pacing is very good.  Action sequences are quick and hurried.  At one point,
she covered a lot of ground in only 20 pages.  Looking at before and after, I
was surprised how much had happened in such a small span.

### Things I Didn't Like About It

I didn't care for the West Coast geography.  Or any of it, really.  I happened
to be working at the Googleplex at the time the action is set, and it didn't
quite look like that.

Some of the prose felt contrived.

> radioactive hailstorm of bad blood
> <footer>p. 36</footer>

> The sky was starting to turn a dark cerulean blue with the approaching sunrise.
> <footer>p. 43</footer>

Cora could have been more nuanced when guessing everyone's (ulterior) motives
and playing one character against another.  Rather than take everyone at face
value, she could have made educated guesses regarding Lucianna, Sol, and
Ampersand, and re-assess as things played out through her interactions with
them.  She could then have identified moments when contradictory possibilities
existed, and adjust her interactions to elicit answers that would lead her to
their true motives.  Like when Hamlet questions whether the ghost is truly his
father or the devil, and he goes about to verify what the ghost had told him.
If she had been initially suspicious of Ampersand but then had gained confidence
through experimentation, the relationship would have been that much stronger.

One drawback of the publication cycle: Ellis missed out on current events at the
time the novel was published.  The novel came out in the era of Trump, and that
will influence the readers' perception.   In the novel, President Bush is caught
in a lie to Congress and resigns.  In real life, President Trump was impeached
but nothing came of it.  You can't expect the reader to ignore these facts when
reading it in July 2020, even if it was written some years before.

### Wrapping Up

I choose to believe Lindsay Ellis is attempting to be a writer, and that she
wrote her novel in earnest.  I liked it very much and I look forward to the next
part of the story.

<span class="newthought">Note:</span> In
[this interview](https://youtu.be/8UkpU-KKLyc), Ellis seems pretty earnest
about writing the novel.
